Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

S HARING S TATE B ETWEEN P ROMPTS AND P ROGRAMS
Ellie Y. Cheng Logan Weber Tian Jin Michael Carbin
MIT CSAIL
{ellieyhc, loganweb, tianjin, mcarbin}@csail.mit.edu

A BSTRACT
The rise of large language models (LLMs) has introduced a new type of programming: natural language programming. Users write prompts, which are instructions
in natural language, to direct LLMs to perform tasks such as natural language
processing, code generation, reasoning, etc.
An emerging area of research enables interoperability between prompts and programs. We present a novel programming abstraction, shared program state, that
removes the manual work required to enable interoperability between prompts and
program states. With shared program state, programmers can write prompts that
directly access program variables, compute with program objects, and implement
control flow in the program. We present a schema for specifying natural function
interfaces that extend programming systems to support programs with prompts and
leverage this schema to specify shared program state as a natural function interface.
We implement shared program state in the N IGHTJAR programming system1 .
N IGHTJAR enables programmers to write Python programs containing prompts
that share the Python program state. We show that N IGHTJAR programs achieve
comparable or higher task accuracy than manually written implementations (+419%), while decreasing the lines of code by 39.6% on average. The tradeoff is that
N IGHTJAR may incur runtime overhead (0.4-4.3x manual implementations).

1

I NTRODUCTION

Writing prompts, which are instructions in natural language, for large language model (LLM) systems
to evaluate is a new form of programming: natural language programming. LLMs have become
increasingly capable, leading to widespread adoption of prompting for tasks such as natural language
processing, code generation, and mathematical reasoning (Achiam et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2024;
Chen et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2025; Liang et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2025; Qin et al., 2023; Wei et al.,
2022). Prompts enable a higher level of abstraction in comparison to traditional programs, as prompts
require fewer operational details.
Prompt & Program Interoperability. Programs offering precision and structure. Programs also
support rich programming abstractions, including variables, data structures, and control flow. An
emerging trend of programming systems enables interoperability between prompts and programs, in
which the prompts and the programs operate on common data (Adept, 2024; Anthropic, b; BeurerKellner et al., 2023; BoundaryML, 2025; Chase, 2022; Dinu, 2022; Dong et al., 2025; Firebase
Team; Gat; Guidance AI; Khattab et al., 2024; Liu & Contributors, 2024; Microsoft, b; Okuda &
Amarasinghe, 2024; OpenAI; PrefectHQ; Vaziri et al., 2024; Willard & Louf, 2023; Yuksekgonul
et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2024). Programmers develop programs containing prompts, and these
programming systems orchestrate the interface between the prompts and the programs. Figure 1a
shows an example Python program containing a prompt.
Existing systems evaluate prompts in a separate environment from the program. Programmers must
therefore manually implement the transfer of data and, broadly, program state across the boundary
between the environments. We term such a design as isolated program state. Figure 1a demonstrates
the manual work required to transfer program state in the isolated program state design.
1

https://github.com/psg-mit/nightjarpy

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38

from pydantic import BaseModel
from llm_wrapper import llm
class Graph: ...
class EdgeSchema(BaseModel):
src: int
tgts: list[int]
class GraphSchema(BaseModel):
nodes: list[int]
edges: list[EdgeSchema]
def serialize(g: Graph) -> str: ...
def reify(gs: GraphSchema) -> Graph:
nodes = set(gs.nodes)
edges = {e.src: set(e.tgts) \
for e in gs.edges}
return Graph(nodes=nodes, edges=edges)
def main():
graph = Graph(...)
while True:
query = input("Q: ")
class OutputSchema(BaseModel):
response: Optional[str]
break_flag: bool
graph: Optional[GraphSchema]
q_out = llm(
f"""Perform the <query> with
respect to <graph>, where nodes are
paper IDs and edges point from a cited
paper to a set of papers that cite it.
Return `break_flag` as True if <query>
indicates termination. Else, return a
`response`. If <graph> was updated,
return it as `graph`.
<query>{query}</query>
<graph>{serialize(graph)}</graph>""",
output_type=OutputSchema)
if q_out.break_flag:
break
response = q_out.response
if q_out.graph:
graph = reify(q_out.graph)
print(f"A: {response}")
print(f"Papers that cite paper 14:")
print(graph.edges[14])
main()

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

import nightjar
class Graph:
nodes: set[int]
edges: dict[int, set[int]]
@nightjar.fn
def main():
graph = Graph(...)
while True:
query = input("Q: ")
"""prompt
Perform the <query> with respect to
<graph>, where nodes are paper IDs
and edges point from a cited paper to
a set of papers that cite it. Break
if <query> indicates termination.
Else, save a <:response> and update
<graph> to answer <query>.
"""
print(f"A: {response}")
print(f"Papers that cite paper 14:")
print(graph.edges[14])
main()

(b) Example Program with Shared Program State
$ ./example.py
Q: Update the graph so paper 5 cites 14.
A: Graph updated.
Papers that cite paper 14:
{ 5 }
Q: Exit, please.
$

(c) Example Program Execution Console

Figure 1: Figure 1a shows a program with isolated program state that executes natural language
39
queries on a graph modeling paper citations. Blue
40
highlighted lines show the prompt; gray high41
lighted lines show the work to transfer the pro42
43
gram state between the prompt evaluation and the
44
program. Figure 1b shows the task implemented
using shared program state with N IGHTJAR. Fig(a) Manual Implementation (Isolated Program State) ure 1c shows the input and output of an example
execution. See Section A.1 for the full program.
Shared Program State. We present a novel programming abstraction—shared program state—in
which prompts have direct access to the program state—the variable scopes, the heap, and the control
state of the formal program. The prompts read and write program variables (shared scopes), compute
with program objects (shared heap), and implement control flow in the program (shared control state).
Figure 1b shows an example program written with shared program state.
Natural Function Interface. Shared program state and isolated program state are both instances of a
natural function interface. A natural function interface specifies how prompts interact with the host
program execution. We formalized and designed a schema for designing natural function interfaces
based on effect and handler program constructs (Bauer & Pretnar, 2015; Leijen, 2016; Plotkin &
Power, 2003; Plotkin & Pretnar, 2013). Effects define the actions to be performed, and handlers
define the implementations of the actions. Effects and handlers are a generalization of tool use that
enables using to implement context switches in system execution.
Shared Program State Natural Function Interface. Using our schema, we specified shared
program state as a natural function interface. The interface operates over variables, references, labels,
and program values. It enables prompts to emit effects to the host language to read and write variables
from shared scopes, reference and dereference values from the shared heap, and utilize program
labels in the shared control state.
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Contributions. We present the following contributions in this work:
• We present the shared program state abstraction. Shared program state enables developers to
write more concise programs and focus on the core program logic. Figure 1a illustrates the extra
work a developer would otherwise need to implement themselves to deliver the program with
the same functionality as that of Figure 1b.
• We present a schema for specifying natural function interfaces that extend programming systems
to support programs with prompts. Using this schema, we define the shared program state
natural function interface, a language-agnostic formal specification that defines the mechanisms
by which prompts interact with a host programming system to realize the shared program state
abstraction. System developers can use our specification to implement the shared program state
abstraction in their own programming systems.
• We implemented the shared program state natural function interface as the N IGHTJAR programming system to demonstrate the efficacy of programming with the shared program state
abstraction. We show that N IGHTJAR programs achieve comparable or higher task accuracy
than manually written implementations (+4-19%), while decreasing the lines of code by 39.6%
on average. The tradeoff to using N IGHTJAR is that it may incur runtime overhead (0.4-4.3x
runtime of manual implementations).
Implications. Our work introduces shared program state, a new abstraction for programming with
prompts in programs. Shared program state enables programmers to focus on program logic by
delegating the low-level work of enabling interoperability to the natural function interface implementation. Our work highlights the emerging computing paradigm brought by the rise of LLMs in
which computations are dynamically and adaptively planned, implemented, and executed on-the-fly
according to the live context.

2

R ELATED W ORK

Natural Language as Programming. The idea of integrating natural language in programs dates
back to literate programming (Knuth, 1984) and has been popularized by the use of Jupyter and
IPython notebooks (Pérez & Granger, 2007). This line of work does not treat natural language
as executable code, but instead as documentation describing the behavior of the program or as
macros for programmer-written code. The popularity of using natural language prompts to perform
computation has risen as LLM capabilities improve. Several works coin prompting as a form of
programming (Beurer-Kellner et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2024; Khattab et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2025).
Our work takes this a step further by unifying the state between prompts and program.
Language Interoperability. Language interoperability is the task of enabling a software system to
leverage multiple different programming languages computing with common data in its implementation. Language interoperability has a long history (Benton & Kennedy, 1999; Breg et al., 1998;
Burroughs Corporation, 1961; Davis et al., 1994; Finne et al., 1999; Graham, 1966; Jeffery et al.,
1999; Konstantas, 1993; Laddad & Sen, 2020; Matthews & Findler, 2007; Microsoft, a; Nelson, 1981;
Object Management Group, 1991; Oracle, 2017; Osborne et al., 2024; Python Software Foundation,
2025; The MathWorks, Inc., 2025; Wagner et al., 2024), dating back at least 50 years as the software
engineering community has sought to build increasingly sophisticated software systems that span
increasingly more components, each suited to development in a particular programming languages.
Isolated Program State. In recent years, enabling interoperability between prompts and programs
have become an area of active research. Most prior work (Anthropic, b; Beurer-Kellner et al., 2023;
BoundaryML, 2025; Chase, 2022; Dinu, 2022; Dong et al., 2025; Firebase Team; Gat; Guidance AI;
Khattab et al., 2024; Liu & Contributors, 2024; Microsoft, b; OpenAI; Vaziri et al., 2024; Willard &
Louf, 2023; Yuksekgonul et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2024) isolates prompts evaluation from program
execution. Specifically, prompts have no visibility to the program state. In general, the programmer
writes code to serialize program data to pass to the LLM in the prompt. The LLM returns a string
value by default, and the programmer optionally writes a schema to define how the output string is
reified into program data. Systems that enable code interpreter tools to answer a natural language
prompt (Anthropic, b; Chen et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023; OpenAI) isolate the code execution from
the program that the natural language prompt is embedded in. Our work enables a new programming
model of interoperability in which the prompt evaluation shares the program state of the host program.
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Programmer-Defined Tools. In systems that support interoperable programs with isolated program
states, programmers can define custom functions and implement tool use to manually convert LLM
responses into operations on the program state. Several systems automatically make tool calls using
programmer defined functions (Beurer-Kellner et al., 2023; Chase, 2022; Dong et al., 2025; Firebase
Team). Our shared program state abstraction does not require programmers to define custom functions
for the prompt to perform operations on the program state.
Partially Shared Program State. Other systems enable partially shared program state (Adept,
2024; Dantanarayana et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2023; Okuda & Amarasinghe, 2024; PrefectHQ).
Marvin (PrefectHQ) and MTP (Dantanarayana et al., 2025) support reading function arguments and
serialization/reification of program data, but do not enable prompts to manipulate mutable objects
in-place. AskIt (Okuda & Amarasinghe, 2024) and ANPL (Huang et al., 2023) replace prompts with
LLM-generated functions. The generated functions can access object references passed as function
arguments. None of the above methods enable prompts to read variables outside of the function scope
(and thus cannot support closures), write variables, nor implement control flow. AWL (Adept, 2024)
is a domain-specific language for web interactions; prompts evaluate on shared webpages with the
program but not shared program state.

3

S HARED P ROGRAM S TATE BY E XAMPLE

N IGHTJAR integrates prompts as first-class code in Python programs: The prompts can read and write
Python variables, compute with Python objects, and manipulate the control flow of the surrounding
Python program. Figure 1b shows an example program that uses shared program state via N IGHTJAR.
3.1

E XAMPLE P ROGRAM

The program implements an agent that manipulates a directed graph of paper citations. The nodes are
paper identifiers, represented by a set of integers. The edges connect a cited paper to papers that cite
it, represented by a dictionary of source nodes to sets of target nodes.
The main function uses a while-loop (Line 8) to continuously read in user queries from standard
input. A triple-quoted string with the language identifier prompt demarcates a prompt, as shown on
Lines 10 and 18. The prompt specifies the agent’s behavior in natural language: The agent performs
the given query by writing to a variable named response and updating the graph. Execution breaks
out of the while-loop if the query signals the user is finished with the program; otherwise, the agent
prints the response and the papers that cite paper 14 on Lines 19 to 21. Figure 1c shows program
outputs with the inputs of a query that adds a new edge and a query that ends the program.
3.2

S HARED P ROGRAM S TATE

At first glance, the prompt in Figure 1b might look like a comment to be filled in by the programmer,
but prompts with shared program state are first-class code. Prompts evaluate with shared scopes,
shared heap, and shared control state with the Python program state.
Shared Scopes. Prompts read and write Python variables in the shared scopes. Prompts can refer
to any live Python variables within scope using the syntax <var>. For example, on Line 11, the
prompt reads the query variable, which on the first loop is assigned to "Update the graph so
paper 5 cites 14". <:var> denotes variable assignments. Line 16 writes a string response "Graph
updated." to the response variable that is printed to standard output on Line 19. Shared scopes
enable the response variable to be used in Python like any other variable in that scope.
Shared Heap. Prompts access Python objects by reference in the Python heap. The prompt in
Figure 1b adds an edge in the graph object with an in-place update to the existing graph.edges
dictionary of the existing graph object in the program’s heap, equivalent to the Python code
graph.edges[14].add(5). The update persists after the prompt evaluation. By referencing the
existing graph pointer, Lines 20 to 21 prints out that paper 5 is in the set of papers that cite paper 14.
Shared Control State. Prompts also manipulate the evaluation context in the shared control state
through program labels. When the query variable indicates the user is finished with the program, like
the second example query "Exit, please", the prompt updates the evaluation context to after the
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

a
def main():
while True:
query = input (ÒQ: Ó)

Python Interpreter

Program State
Scopes

b query: ÒExit, please.Ó

query: ÒExit, pleaseÓ

Heap

Perform the <query> É

@3: Graph(É)

É
main()

Control State
PC: L9

c
Perform the <query> É

LLM

d Lookup(query)

f
e
i
ÒExit,
query please.Ó L22

g resume ÒExit, please.Ó

Handler

Prompt Evaluation

h Goto(break)

Figure 2: a) An example execution of Figure 1b, in which the prompt uses shared program state. b)
The Python interpreter reads and writes to the program state, such as by writing the variable query.
c) The Python interpreter hands the execution control to the LLM to evaluate the prompt. d) The
LLM emits a Lookup request to read the query variable. e) The handler reads query from the shared
scopes, f) which has the value "Exit, please." g) The handler resumes prompt evaluation with the
value of query. h) The LLM emits another request, Goto, to update the evaluation context to the
break program label (i.e. outside the while-loop). Finally, i) the handler manipulates the control
state accordingly without resuming prompt evaluation, implementing control flow.
loop, in effect breaking out of it. Correspondingly, the print-statements on Lines 19 to 21 are not
executed, and the program gracefully exits.
Without Shared Program State. Without shared program state, prompts only read and write
serialized string values with no other effects on the Python program. Programmers have to write code
to manually serialize input data and convert serialized output values into operations on the program
state. In Figure 1a, we show an illustrative example of how a programmer might implement the task
manually without using shared program state. Without shared program state, the programmer has to
write Python code to manually serialize and reify data structures, to update objects in the heap, and
invoke control flow primitives. Shared program state provides an abstraction over the intermediary
connecting code between a prompt and the program state.
3.3

E XECUTING P ROGRAMS WITH S HARED P ROGRAM S TATE

We implemented the N IGHTJAR programming system with shared program state. N IGHTJAR uses an
LLM agent to evaluate prompts. The LLM agent issues effects, which are requests to the programming
system for manipulations to the Python program state. N IGHTJAR implements handlers, which receive
these effects and interface with the Python program state. Figure 2 shows a diagram of N IGHTJAR
evaluating a prompt with shared program state.
Table 1: Average pass rate and runtime of
Table 1 shows the performance of the Figure 1a pro- Figure 1 programs, with time ranges in gray.
gram (manual programmer implementation) and the
Method
Pass Rate Time (s)
Figure 1b program (using N IGHTJAR) on a graph of
Manual
Impl
0.33±0.00
31.3
25 nodes with 6 different natural language queries
(28.7-35.0)
(Section A.2). N IGHTJAR achieves higher pass rate
N IGHTJAR (Ours) 0.83±0.12
77.2
(72.7-83.0)
in this task than the manual implementation, because
the LLM agent adapts to program inputs and intermediate program values. For example, for the query Update the graph so paper 5 cites 14, the
LLM decides to issue effects to update only the dictionary entry for paper 14. Without shared program
state, the programmer must decide and implement the specific mechanisms for the prompt to interact
with the program state. In Figure 1a, the programmer implemented updates to the graph by querying
the LLM to generate the entire updated graph, which is prone to hallucinations. Shared program state
offloads the work of reasoning about and implementing updates to the program state to the LLM
agent. The tradeoff to the abstraction is that the LLM agent incurs runtime overhead. Our work
shows that engineering efforts reduce the overhead, offering opportunities for future work to improve
the accuracy and runtime of shared program state programming systems.
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

4

A NATURAL F UNCTION I NTERFACE FOR S HARED P ROGRAM S TATE

We developed shared program state to enable a higher level of abstraction when using prompts within
programs: The prompts manipulate the host program state directly. To define the mechanisms by
which a prompt interfaces with the host program state, we first describe the natural function interface
schema for extending programming systems with support for prompts in programs. Then, we formally
specify shared program state as a natural function interface.
4.1

NATURAL F UNCTION I NTERFACES

A natural function interface is a specification of how prompts transfer data or utilizes services of a
host programming language. A natural function interface provides definitions of 1) the values that
cross the boundary between the prompt and the program, 2) effects, which are distinguished requests
by the prompt for interacting with the surrounding code, and 3) handlers that define the behavior
of the requests as implemented in the host system. Natural function interface is a generalization of
tool use, as defined by OpenAI documentation (OpenAI) and MCP (Model Context Protocol). In
Section B, we formalized natural function interfaces using effects and handlers (Bauer & Pretnar,
2015; Leijen, 2016; Plotkin & Power, 2003; Plotkin & Pretnar, 2013).
Values. The values of a natural function interface are the data types that the prompt takes as input
and output from the host system (NFI Values in Figure 3). While LLMs typically take strings as
input and output, a natural function interface can specify richer data types and leverage serialization
and reification such as through JSON formatting and Pydantic (Colvin et al., 2025) to automatically
convert between string and program data types.
Effects. The effects of a natural function interface are the requests that the prompt expects the host
language to fulfill (NFI Effects in Figure 3). The prompt evaluates to either a value or an effect,
denoting the request the host language should fulfill so that the prompt evaluation can continue.
Handler. The handler of a natural function interface defines the implementation of the effect requests
by the host language (NFI Handler in Figure 3). When the prompt evaluates to an effect, the handler
that wraps the prompt catches the effect and fulfills the request.
As described, effects and handlers are similar in behavior to elements of the OpenAI function calling
API. In the function calling API, the LLM can request a function to be called and the client of the
API will interpret the function and provide the value back to the API, whereupon the LLM resumes
its evaluation. Where a natural function interface extends the function calling API is with the ability
for the handler to explicitly either resume evaluation (as is typical) or cancel the continued evaluation
of the prompt (new). Cancelling the prompt evaluation enables the host program and the prompt to
coordinate rich control flow patterns.
A natural function interface is a contract between the host language and the prompt. Specifically, the
LLM system that evaluates the prompt must support 1) serialization/reification of the defined values,
2) checkpointing of the prompt evaluation when emitting an effect (as execution control switches
to the handlers), 3) restoration of prompt evaluation from a checkpoint when the handler initiates
resumption, and 4) cleanup of the prompt evaluation when the handler cancels the prompt evaluation.
4.2

S HARED P ROGRAM S TATE AS A NATURAL F UNCTION I NTERFACE

Now we turn to specifying shared program state as a natural function interface, as shown in Figure 3.
We assume a general host language that supports variable bindings (shared scopes), mutable state
(shared heap), and control flow constructs (shared control state).
Shared Scopes. The values to support shared scopes are the names of variables in the host program.
The effects are Lookup and Assign. For Lookup requests, the handler retrieves the value of the
requested variable in the current scope and uses the resume keyword to restore prompt evaluation
with the value. The requested variable must be in the set of variable names the LLM is allowed to
read, denoted as Xi . For the Assign request, the handler makes the variable binding in the current
scope then resumes prompt evaluation with the variable binding still in place. The variable must be
in the set of variable names that the LLM is allowed to write to, denoted as Xo .
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Variables
Host Language

x ∈X
References a ∈ A
eH ::= v | ...
| x | let x = e in e
| !e | ref e | e := e
| label ℓ : e | goto ℓ

Prompts
NFI Values
NFI Effects

NFI Handler

Program

Labels

ℓ∈L
Host Values
values
variable bindings
mutable state
control flow

v

n
Serialization α : v → vN
Reification γ : vN → v
i ,Xo ,L
Prompt Evaluation natXi ,Xo ,L : n × vN → v | op X
N
vN ⊆ v

i ,Xo ,L
op X
::= Lookup(xi ) | Assign(xo , vN )
N
| Deref(vN ) | Ref(vN ) | Set(a, vN )
| Goto(ℓ)

hN ::= handle {
finally vN → γ(vN );
Lookup(x ) → resume α(x );
Assign(x , vN ) →
let x = γ(vN ) in resume α(());
Deref(vN ) → resume α(!γ(vN ));
Ref(vN ) → resume α(ref γ(vN ));
Set(a, vN ) →
resume α(γ(a) := γ(vN ));
Goto(ℓ) → goto γ(ℓ)
}
e ::= eH | hN (natXi ,Xo ,L (n, α(v )))

xi ∈ X i ; x o ∈ X o
ℓ∈L

get variable
set variable
get value at reference
create reference with value
set value at reference
set evaluation context to label
prompt with shared program state

Figure 3: Shared Program State Natural Function Interface.
Shared Heap. The values to support shared heap are references. Deref, Ref, and Set are the effects.
The handler fulfills these effects by resuming prompt evaluation with the value evaluated from the
dereference, reference, and set host program construct, respectively.
Shared Control State. The values to support shared control state are program labels. The corresponding effect is Goto. The handler dispatches the Goto effect by jumping the evaluation context
to the specified label in the effect. Notably, the handler does not resume prompt evaluation while
handling this effect, which implements control flow. The label must be in the set of labels that the
LLM is allowed to jump to, denoted as L.

5

N IGHTJAR P ROGRAMMING S YSTEM

We implemented the shared program state natural function interface as the N IGHTJAR programming
system with Python as the host language. N IGHTJAR uses an LLM agent to translate prompts into
effects. In this section, we discuss implementation details for N IGHTJAR.
5.1

I MPLEMENTATION

Shared Scopes. N IGHTJAR distinguishes Python variables from regular words within a prompt using
the syntax <var> for variable references and <:var> for variable assignments and parses them into
Xi and Xo , respectively. To seamlessly bind output variables without the overhead of static abstract
syntax tree transformations, N IGHTJAR dynamically injects the evaluated Xo variables directly into
the host function’s locals() dictionary at runtime. Specifically, the handler enforces that the LLM
agent only lookup <var>-denoted variables. If the LLM attempts to look up any other variable,
the handler provides the LLM with an error message. This prevents the LLM agent from reading
hallucinated variables or variables the programmer does not want the LLM to read. The handler
also enforces that <:var>-denoted variables must be defined at the end of the prompt evaluation,
providing the LLM with an error message if it attempts to terminate evaluation when these variables
are undefined. This check enables programmers to reason about which variables are live after a
prompt.
Shared Heap. N IGHTJAR represents all Python objects as data in the shared heap, represented by
references. This enables prompts to manipulate mutable Python objects in-place. Only plain old
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

data types that are immutable, such as strings, integers, floats, booleans, and null-types, are passed
directly through the NFI. Additionally, the handler provides the LLM agent with an error message if
it attempts to read invalid references.
Shared Control State. Because Python does not support the low-level goto program construct,
N IGHTJAR performs a source code transformation to install try-except blocks as program labels.
N IGHTJAR exposes program labels corresponding to Python built-in control flow primitives such
as break, continue, return, and raise to the LLM to use with the Goto effect. N IGHTJAR only
exposes program labels that are valid within the evaluation context of the prompt. For example, the
program label corresponding to break is only exposed when the prompt is within a loop.
5.2

S YSTEM E NGINEERING

One implementatin of shared program state in a programming system is by querying the LLM agent
to generate the effects exactly as defined in Figure 3. While this implementation is language-agnostic,
it is not designed to be performant. Realizing shared program state as a performant abstraction
requires additional system engineering. To improve performance, we specialize N IGHTJAR to Python
and implement optimizations for reducing runtime.
Specialization. We designed shared program state natural function interface to be general to capture
the underlying semantics of the shared program state abstraction. The tradeoff of the general approach
is the loss of specialized host-language features such as first-class functions, abstract methods, and
high-level control flow constructs. It also relies entirely on the LLM to perform data transformations.
We specialize N IGHTJAR to Python so that it supports these Python-specific language features and
enables Python-based computation. In this implementation, the effects Eval (evaluates a Python
expression and returns the result) and Exec (executes a block of Python code in the evaluation context)
replace the Lookup, Assign, Deref, Ref, and Set effects. The effects Break, Continue, Return, and
Raise replace Goto, corresponding to the respective Python primitives.
Eager Variable Loading. During execution, the LLM selects a subset of the variables mentioned in
the prompt and inspects their value and type by issuing effects. However, each LLM agent step incurs
runtime overhead. We apply an optimization to eagerly load the values and types of the mentioned
variables to the LLM, to reduce the number of effects the LLM issues and thus reduce the runtime.
The tradeoff is that the value and types of variables the LLM would otherwise not select for inspection
are also placed in context, introducing additional token cost.
Caching. We implement a simple caching scheme where the LLM API client stores pairs of LLM
agent effect trace history and the response. When given identical agent effect trace histories, the
client returns the stored response rather than querying fresh responses from LLM APIs. This enables
time savings until the LLM reads program inputs it has not seen before.

6

E VALUATION

In this work, we presented shared program state, a new programming abstraction that delegates the
work of enabling interoperability between a prompt and the program state to the natural function
interface implementation. We implemented the N IGHTJAR programming system to execute programs
with prompts using shared program state. We next perform an evaluation to answer the following:
• RQ1. Does shared program state enable more concise programs?
• RQ2. Can programs with shared program state perform as well as manual implementations?
Benchmarks. Since there are no existing benchmark suites that evaluate shared program state, we
introduce SPSBench. SPSBench is a suite of 25 programs that contain prompts using shared program
state. We adapted several of the programs from the documentation of LLM-related Python packages.
We constructed additional programs to evaluate more complex manipulations on the program state by
prompts, such as creating closures, in-place state mutations, using generators, defining subclasses,
and raising errors. See Section C for program descriptions.
Baselines. For each program, we implemented the same task using a simplified LLM API that
takes a prompt and an optional Pydantic (Colvin et al., 2025) model or JSON schema; we call
these Manual Implementation programs. Manual Implementation (Code Interpreter) executes the
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Table 2: Average pass rate with standard deviation and average runtime with ranges in gray.
Model

Method

Pass Rate

Sonnet 4 Manual Impl

0.78±0.03

Sonnet 4 Manual Impl (Code Interpreter) 0.66±0.04
Sonnet 4 N IGHTJAR (Baseline)

0.60±0.04

Sonnet 4 N IGHTJAR

0.85±0.03

GPT-4.1 Manual Impl

0.74±0.03

GPT-4.1 Manual Impl (Code Interpreter) 0.72±0.03
GPT-4.1 N IGHTJAR (Baseline)

0.61±0.02

GPT-4.1 N IGHTJAR

0.78±0.03

Time (s)
8.0

(1.3-44.8)

36.8

(3.2-171.5)

55.6

(9.6-721.0)

25.9

(6.2-83.0)

4.5

(0.8-15.0)

50.3

(10.9-364.9)

39.0

(4.7-957.4)

19.6

(3.0-72.1)

manual implementation programs with official code interpreter tools from OpenAI and Anthropic
enabled in LLM API calls, which are isolated from the host program but enable the LLM to perform
Python-based calculations. The third baseline, N IGHTJAR (Baseline), executes shared program state
programs using N IGHTJAR without specialization or optimizations.
RQ1: Methodology. We compared the Manual Implementation programs against shared program
state programs. We counted the number of lines to implement the task in each implementation, not
counting scaffolding for testing nor empty lines and comments. We used the Black Formatter linter
with a maximum width of 120 characters to standardize the formatting.
RQ1: Results. Manual Implementation has 42.0 lines of code on average, with a range of 7 to 207
lines. In contrast, shared program state has 25.1 lines of code on average and a range of 7 to 166 lines.
Shared program state enables a decrease of 17.0 lines of code on average, with a range of 0 to 60
lines of code decreased. Shared program state enables programmers to write more concise programs.
RQ2: Methodology. We compare the performance of the shared program state programs executed
using N IGHTJAR against Manual Implementation, Manual Implementation (Code Interpreter), and
N IGHTJAR (Baseline). We used Claude-Sonnet-4-20250514 and GPT-4.1-2025-04-14 as the LLMs.
We used the default temperature value of 1 and executed each program implementation of the
benchmark 5 times. We computed the average pass rate averaged over runs, where the average pass
rate is the average percentage of passing assertions of each program. We set a limit of 300 tool calls
or effects and a timeout of 1000 seconds. See Section D for the system prompts.
RQ2: Results. Table 2 shows the average pass rate with standard deviation and the average
runtime with range. N IGHTJAR achieves comparable or higher average pass rate than Manual
Implementation and Manual Implementation (Code Interpreter), demonstrating that the shared
program state abstraction can be realized as executable programs. The tradeoff to the shared program
state abstraction is that N IGHTJAR incurs a runtime overhead compared to the chat completion-only
usages of Manual Implementation because N IGHTJAR uses an LLM agent to evaluate prompts.
However, the Manual Implementation (Code Interpreter) also incurs a runtime overhead.
The N IGHTJAR (Baseline) achieves lower pass rate compared to Manual Implementation and Manual
Implementation (Code Interpreter). This is because N IGHTJAR (Baseline) is language-agnostic
and thus cannot correctly complete tasks that require Python-specific data types such as first-class
functions and abstract classes. N IGHTJAR (Baseline) is also slower than Manual Implementation
(Code Interpreter), because the LLM agent spends additional time, attempting to find work around
for tasks that it cannot complete. N IGHTJAR bridges this performance gap by specializing the system
to Python to support these features and enabling Python-based computations.
The additional engineering in N IGHTJAR reduces the runtime overhead by 2.0-2.1x compared to
N IGHTJAR (Baseline). This suggests that the performance of the shared program state abstraction can
be improved with more sophisticated implementations in future work. Section E contains additional
ablation results and Section F presents a failure analysis of N IGHTJAR executions.
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

7

L IMITATIONS & F UTURE W ORK

Shared program state is a novel programming abstraction that automates the work of enabling interoperability between prompts and the program state. As a novel abstraction, numerous opportunities
remain for extending the design that are beyond the scope of this work.
Safety & Security. Shared program state enables prompts to directly read and write objects in memory.
This is a departure from the existing systems that do not enable shared program state (Anthropic, b;
Beurer-Kellner et al., 2023; BoundaryML, 2025; Chase, 2022; Dong et al., 2025; Firebase Team;
Gat; Guidance AI; Khattab et al., 2024; Liu & Contributors, 2024; Microsoft, b; OpenAI; PrefectHQ;
Vaziri et al., 2024; Willard & Louf, 2023; Yuksekgonul et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2024); these systems
provide isolation in that the prompts are completely separated from the program. In existing systems,
programmers are in full control over how a prompt interacts with the program state. Shared program
state blurs this boundary. While N IGHTJAR provides partial safety mechanisms in the handlers, these
mechanisms are not complete.
This tradeoff between usability, safety, and performance is well studied in the operating systems and
language-based memory isolation literature. Heap isolation (Back & Hsieh, 2005; Von Eicken et al.,
1999), while offering safety from inconsistent states, requires marshaling and copying data which
introduces high overheads (Emmerich et al., 2019). Work that develops safety mechanisms with
abstractions such as single ownership (Hunt & Larus, 2007; Lafrance et al., 2023; Narayanan et al.,
2020) bridges these tradeoffs by enabling zero-copy communication on shared heap. We anticipate
fruitful, future research that develops richer safety mechanisms for shared program state, potentially
inspired by this previous work. Exploring other execution substrates, such as using a subset of Python
that can be compiled to a DSL with security and reliability benefits (Mell et al., 2025) may reveal
additional points in the tradeoff space between execution time, correctness, security, and reliability.
Safety also extends beyond isolation. Work in the approximate computing literature on distinguishing
reliably and unreliably computed data is also relevant in that the developed techniques can enable
users to reason about the downstream effects of values computed by the LLM (Carbin et al., 2013;
Sampson et al., 2011). Our work also emphasizes the importance of defending against vulnerabilities
in LLM-based software (Chang et al., 2024), especially inference-time defenses against malicious
user inputs, such as pre-processing of inputs to LLMs (Li et al., 2023; Mo et al., 2025; Wei et al.,
2026) and post-processing of LLM generated data and code (Phute et al., 2023; Qi et al., 2021).
Performance. N IGHTJAR opens up a new line of work on improving the execution time and
correctness of programming systems enabling shared program state. We foresee future work in
optimizing effects akin to bytecode optimizations (Clausen, 1997; Vallée-Rai et al., 1999; Xu &
Kjolstad, 2021), applying parallel generation techniques (Jin et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2024; Pan et al.,
2025; Yang et al., 2025), and sophisticated caching schemes to decrease the execution time. We also
anticipate future system designs that improve correctness, such as by incorporating automatic natural
language prompt optimizations (Chen et al., 2024; Fernando et al., 2024; Khattab et al., 2024; Pryzant
et al., 2023; Schnabel & Neville, 2024; Yuksekgonul et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2022).
Program Development Tools. As a new programming abstraction, shared program state calls for
future work on program development tools, such as debuggers, testing tools, and program analyses,
that assist programmers in writing prompts that achieves low execution time and high accuracy (Liang
et al., 2025). These tools would need to combine both traditional program development needs (e.g.
identifying inputs that cause bugs (Cadar et al., 2008a;b)) as well as the needs of prompt development
(e.g. testing the prompt robustness with respect to a given LLM (Sharma et al., 2025)).

8

C ONCLUSION

Shared program state enables programmers to focus on core program logic when using prompts in
their programs. The abstraction offloads the work of enabling interoperability between the prompts
and the host program to an LLM. By using an LLM agent to plan, implement, and execute highlevel natural language instructions, N IGHTJAR enables live dynamic computations that adapt to
program inputs and intermediate values, which is not scalable to implement manually in traditional
programming. This emerging paradigm of adaptive computing, in which software is dynamically
10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

programmed to the context, enables a new promising class of systems that remain robust under
changing contexts without large-scale manual engineering.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported in part by the National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship under Grant No. 2141064 and the CSAIL-Felicis Research Program. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. We thank Jesse
Michel, Charles Yuan, Eric Li, Linlu Qiu, and Daniel Pfrommer for helpful feedback on this work.

R EFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Adept. Building powerful agents with adept, 2024.
adept-agents.

URL https://www.adept.ai/blog/

Anthropic. Welcome to claude, a. URL https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/welcome.
Anthropic. Code execution tool – agents and tools (anthropic api documentation). https://docs.
anthropic.com/en/docs/agents-and-tools/tool-use/code-execution-tool, b.
Godmar Back and Wilson C Hsieh. The kaffeos java runtime system. ACM Transactions on
Programming Languages and Systems, 27(4), 2005.
Andrej Bauer and Matija Pretnar. Programming with algebraic effects and handlers. Journal of
Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming, 84(1), 2015.
Nick Benton and Andrew Kennedy. Interlanguage working without tears: Blending sml with java. In
International Conference on Functional Programming, 1999.
Luca Beurer-Kellner, Marc Fischer, and Martin Vechev. Prompting is programming: A query
language for large language models. In International Conference on Programming Language
Design and Implementation, 2023.
BoundaryML. Baml: The ai framework that adds the engineering to prompt engineering. https:
//github.com/boundaryml/baml, 2025.
Fabian Breg, Shridhar Diwan, Juan Villacis, Jayashree Balasubramanian, Esra Akman, and Dennis
Gannon. Java rmi performance and object model interoperability: Experiments with java/hpc++.
Concurrency: Practice and Experience, 10(11-13), 1998.
Burroughs Corporation. The descriptor: A definition of the b 5000 information processing system.
Technical report, Burroughs Corporation, Sales Tech. Serv. Sys. Doc., 1961.
Cristian Cadar, Daniel Dunbar, and Dawson Engler. Klee: unassisted and automatic generation of
high-coverage tests for complex systems programs. In Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation, 2008a.
Cristian Cadar, Vijay Ganesh, Peter M Pawlowski, David L Dill, and Dawson R Engler. Exe:
Automatically generating inputs of death. Transactions on Information and System Security, 12(2),
2008b.
Michael Carbin, Sasa Misailovic, and Martin C Rinard. Verifying quantitative reliability for programs
that execute on unreliable hardware. In Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages and
Applications, 2013.
Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu, Linyi Yang, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, Xiaoyuan
Yi, Cunxiang Wang, Yidong Wang, et al. A survey on evaluation of large language models. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 15(3), 2024.
11

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Harrison Chase. Langchain, 2022. URL https://github.com/langchain-ai/langchain.
Lichang Chen, Jiuhai Chen, Tom Goldstein, Heng Huang, and Tianyi Zhou. Instructzero: Efficient
instruction optimization for black-box large language models. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2024.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared
Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W Cohen. Program of thoughts prompting:
Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. Transactions on Machine
Learning Research, 2023.
Lars R Clausen. A java bytecode optimizer using side-effect analysis. Concurrency: Practice and
Experience, 9(11), 1997.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve
math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Samuel Colvin, Eric Jolibois, Hasan Ramezani, Adrian Garcia Badaracco, Terrence Dorsey, David
Montague, Serge Matveenko, Marcelo Trylesinski, Sydney Runkle, David Hewitt, Alex Hall, and
Victorien Plot. Pydantic, 2025. URL https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/.
Jayanaka L Dantanarayana, Yiping Kang, Kugesan Sivasothynathan, Christopher Clarke, Baichuan Li,
Savini Kashmira, Krisztian Flautner, Lingjia Tang, and Jason Mars. Meaning-typed programming:
Language abstraction and runtime for model-integrated applications. In Principles of Programming
Languages, 2025.
Harley Davis, Pierre Parquier, and Nitsan Séniak. Sweet harmony: the talk/c++ connection. In Lisp,
1994.
Marius-Constantin Dinu. Symbolicai: A neuro-symbolic perspective on large language models (llms),
2022. URL https://github.com/ExtensityAI/symbolicai.
Honghua Dong, Qidong Su, Yubo Gao, Zhaoyu Li, Yangjun Ruan, Gennady Pekhimenko, Chris J
Maddison, and Xujie Si. Appl: A prompt programming language for harmonious integration of
programs and large language model prompts. In Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025.
Paul Emmerich, Simon Ellmann, Fabian Bonk, Alex Egger, Esaú García Sánchez-Torija, Thomas
Günzel, Sebastian Di Luzio, Alexandru Obada, Maximilian Stadlmeier, Sebastian Voit, et al. The
case for writing network drivers in high-level programming languages. In ACM/IEEE Symposium
on Architectures for Networking and Communications Systems, 2019.
Li Feng, Ryan Yen, Yuzhe You, Mingming Fan, Jian Zhao, and Zhicong Lu. Coprompt: Supporting
prompt sharing and referring in collaborative natural language programming. In Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2024.
Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Banarse, Henryk Michalewski, Simon Osindero, and Tim Rocktäschel.
Promptbreeder: Self-referential self-improvement via prompt evolution. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Sigbjorn Finne, Daan Leijen, Erik Meijer, and Simon Peyton Jones. Calling hell from heaven and
heaven from hell. In International Conference on Functional Programming, 1999.
Firebase Team. Genkit: An open source framework for building ai-powered apps. https://github.
com/firebase/genkit.
Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and
Graham Neubig. Pal: Program-aided language models. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2023.
12

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Noam Gat. lm-format-enforcer: Enforce the output format (json schema, regex etc) of a language
model. https://github.com/noamgat/lm-format-enforcer.
Robert M. Graham. System Module Interfaces (PL/I Subset for System Programming), 1966.
Guidance AI. Guidance: A guidance language for controlling large language models. https:
//github.com/guidance-ai/guidance.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu
Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1 incentivizes reasoning in llms through reinforcement learning. Nature, 645(8081), 2025.
Horace He and Thinking Machines Lab. Defeating nondeterminism in llm inference. Thinking
Machines Lab: Connectionism, 2025.
Jia He, Mukund Rungta, David Koleczek, Arshdeep Sekhon, Franklin X Wang, and Sadid Hasan.
Does prompt formatting have any impact on llm performance? arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10541,
2024.
Di Huang, Ziyuan Nan, Xing Hu, Pengwei Jin, Shaohui Peng, Yuanbo Wen, Rui Zhang, Zidong Du,
Qi Guo, Yewen Pu, et al. Anpl: towards natural programming with interactive decomposition. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
Galen C Hunt and James R Larus. Singularity: Rethinking the software stack. ACM SIGOPS
Operating Systems Review, 41(2), 2007.
David Jeffery, Tyson Dowd, and Zoltan Somogyi. Mcorba: a corba binding for mercury. In
International Symposium on Practical Aspects of Declarative Languages, 1999.
Tian Jin, Ellie Y Cheng, Zack Ankner, Nikunj Saunshi, Blake M Elias, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, Jonathan
Ragan-Kelley, Suvinay Subramanian, and Michael Carbin. Learning to keep a promise: Scaling
language model decoding parallelism with learned asynchronous decoding. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vardhamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller,
Matei Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. Dspy: Compiling declarative language model calls into
self-improving pipelines. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
Donald Ervin Knuth. Literate programming. The Computer Journal, 27(2), 1984.
Dimitri Konstantas. Object oriented interoperability. In European Conference on Object-Oriented
Programming, 1993.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E.
Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
serving with pagedattention. In Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, 2023.
Shadaj Laddad and Koushik Sen. Scalapy: seamless python interoperability for cross-platform scala
programs. In International Symposium on Scala, 2020.
Arthur Lafrance, David Detweiler, Zhaofeng Li, Xiangdong Chen, Vikram Narayanan, and Anton
Burtsev. Extending rust with support for zero copy communication. In Proceedings of the 12th
Workshop on Programming Languages and Operating Systems, 2023.
Daan Leijen. Algebraic effects for functional programming. Microsoft Research Technical Report,
2016.
Linyang Li, Demin Song, and Xipeng Qiu. Text adversarial purification as defense against adversarial
attacks. In Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023.
Jenny T Liang, Melissa Lin, Nikitha Rao, and Brad A Myers. Prompts are programs too! understanding how developers build software containing prompts. Foundations of Software Engineering,
2025.
13

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Yian
Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, et al. Holistic evaluation of language
models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2023.
Jason Liu and Contributors. Instructor: A library for structured outputs from large language models,
2024. URL https://github.com/instructor-ai/instructor.
Mingdao Liu, Aohan Zeng, Bowen Wang, Peng Zhang, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. Apar: Llms can
do auto-parallel auto-regressive decoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06761, 2024.
Jacob Matthews and Robert Bruce Findler. Operational semantics for multi-language programs. In
Principles of Programming Languages, 2007.
Stephen Mell, Botong Zhang, David Mell, Shuo Li, Ramya Ramalingam, Nathan Yu, Steve
Zdancewic, and Osbert Bastani. A fast, reliable, and secure programming language for llm
agents with code actions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12202, 2025.
Microsoft. The component object model specification. https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/
windows/win32/com/component-object-model--com--portal, a.
Microsoft. Typechat: Build natural language interfaces using types. https://github.com/
microsoft/TypeChat, b.
Wenjie Mo, Jiashu Xu, Qin Liu, Jiongxiao Wang, Jun Yan, Chaowei Xiao, and Muhao Chen. Testtime backdoor mitigation for black-box large language models with defensive demonstrations.
In Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2025.
Model Context Protocol.
What is the model context protocol (mcp)?
modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/getting-started/intro.

https://

Vikram Narayanan, Tianjiao Huang, David Detweiler, Dan Appel, Zhaofeng Li, Gerd Zellweger, and
Anton Burtsev. Redleaf: Isolation and communication in a safe operating system. In USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 2020.
Bruce Jay Nelson. Remote procedure call. 1981.
Object Management Group. Common object request broker architecture (corba), version 1.1. Technical report, Object Management Group, 1991. URL https://www.omg.org/spec/CORBA/1.1/.
Katsumi Okuda and Saman Amarasinghe. Askit: Unified programming interface for programming
with large language models. In International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization,
2024.
OpenAI. Openai api documentation – code interpreter. https://platform.openai.com/docs/
guides/tools-code-interpreter.
OpenAI. Introducing openai o3 and o4-mini, 2025.
introducing-o3-and-o4-mini/.

URL https://openai.com/index/

Oracle. Java remote method invocation: 2 - distributed object model, 2017. URL https://docs.
oracle.com/javase/9/docs/specs/rmi/objmodel.html.
Ianna Osborne, Jim Pivarski, and Jerry Ling. Bridging worlds: Achieving language interoperability
between julia and python in scientific computing. In International Workshop on Advanced
Computing and Analysis Techniques in Physics Research, 2024.
Jiayi Pan, Xiuyu Li, Long Lian, Charlie Snell, Yifei Zhou, Adam Yala, Trevor Darrell, Kurt Keutzer,
and Alane Suhr. Learning adaptive parallel reasoning with language models. In Conference on
Language Modeling, 2025.
Fernando Pérez and Brian E Granger. Ipython: a system for interactive scientific computing.
Computing in Science & Engineering, 9(3), 2007.
14

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Mansi Phute, Alec Helbling, Matthew Hull, ShengYun Peng, Sebastian Szyller, Cory Cornelius, and
Duen Horng Chau. Llm self defense: By self examination, llms know they are being tricked. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.07308, 2023.
Gordon Plotkin and John Power. Algebraic operations and generic effects. Applied Categorical
Structures, 11(1), 2003.
Gordon D Plotkin and Matija Pretnar. Handling algebraic effects. Logical Methods in Computer
Science, 9, 2013.
PrefectHQ. Marvin: Ai agents that spark joy. https://github.com/PrefectHQ/marvin.
Reid Pryzant, Dan Iter, Jerry Li, Yin Tat Lee, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng. Automatic prompt
optimization with" gradient descent" and beam search. In Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, 2023.
Python Software Foundation. Extending and Embedding the Python Interpreter. Python Software
Foundation, 2025. URL https://docs.python.org/3/extending/extending.html.
Fanchao Qi, Yangyi Chen, Mukai Li, Yuan Yao, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Onion: A simple
and effective defense against textual backdoor attacks. In Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, 2021.
Chengwei Qin, Aston Zhang, Zhuosheng Zhang, Jiaao Chen, Michihiro Yasunaga, and Diyi Yang. Is
chatgpt a general-purpose natural language processing task solver? In Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023.
Adrian Sampson, Werner Dietl, Emily Fortuna, Danushen Gnanapragasam, Luis Ceze, and Dan
Grossman. Enerj: Approximate data types for safe and general low-power computation. In
International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, 2011.
Tobias Schnabel and Jennifer Neville. Symbolic prompt program search: A structure-aware approach
to efficient compile-time prompt optimization. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, 2024.
Reshabh K Sharma, Jonathan De Halleux, Shraddha Barke, and Benjamin Zorn. Promptpex: Automatic test generation for language model prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05070, 2025.
Zhi Rui Tam, Cheng-Kuang Wu, Yi-Lin Tsai, Chieh-Yen Lin, Hung-yi Lee, and Yun-Nung Chen. Let
me speak freely? a study on the impact of format restrictions on large language model performance.
In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track, 2024.
The MathWorks, Inc. Matlab engine api for python.
matlab-engine-for-python, 2025.

https://github.com/mathworks/

Raja Vallée-Rai, Phong Co, Etienne Gagnon, Laurie Hendren, Patrick Lam, and Vijay Sundaresan.
Soot: A java bytecode optimization framework. In Cascon, 1999.
Mandana Vaziri, Louis Mandel, Claudio Spiess, and Martin Hirzel. Pdl: A declarative prompt
programming language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.19135, 2024.
Thorsten Von Eicken, Chi-Chao Chang, Grzegorz Czajkowski, Chris Hawblitzel, Deyu Hu, and Dan
Spoonhower. J-kernel: A capability-based operating system for java. Secure Internet Programming:
Security Issues for Mobile and Distributed Objects, 1999.
Andrew Wagner, Zachary Eisbach, and Amal Ahmed. Realistic realizability: Specifying abis you can
count on. In Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages and Applications, 2024.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large language models.
Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022.
Zeming Wei, Yifei Wang, Ang Li, Yichuan Mo, and Yisen Wang. Jailbreak and guard aligned
language models with only few in-context demonstrations. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, 2026.
15

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Brandon T Willard and Rémi Louf.
arXiv:2307.09702, 2023.

Efficient guided generation for llms.

arXiv preprint

Haoran Xu and Fredrik Kjolstad. Copy-and-patch compilation: a fast compilation algorithm for
high-level languages and bytecode. In Principles of Programming Languages, 2021.
Xinyu Yang, Yuwei An, Hongyi Liu, Tianqi Chen, and Beidi Chen. Multiverse: Your language models
secretly decide how to parallelize and merge generation. In Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2025.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Pan Lu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin,
and James Zou. Optimizing generative ai by backpropagating language model feedback. Nature,
639(8055), 2025.
Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Livia Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi
Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. Sglang: Efficient execution of
structured language model programs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2024.
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and
Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2022.

16

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

A

E XAMPLE D ETAILS

A.1

F ULL M ANUAL I MPLEMENTATION P ROGRAM

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54

A.2

from pydantic import BaseModel
from llm_wrapper import llm
class Graph:
nodes: set[int]
edges: dict[int, set[int]]
class EdgeSchema(BaseModel):
src: int
tgts: list[int]
class GraphSchema(BaseModel):
nodes: list[int]
edges: list[EdgeSchema]
def serialize(g: Graph) -> str:
s = {
"nodes": list(g.nodes),
"edges": [{"src": src, "tgts": list(tgts)} for src, tgts in g.edges.items()]
}
return json.dumps(s)
def reify(gs: GraphSchema) -> Graph:
nodes = set(gs.nodes)
edges = {e.src: set(e.tgts) for e in gs.edges}
return Graph(nodes=nodes, edges=edges)
def main():
graph = Graph(...)
while True:
query = input("Q: ")
class OutputSchema(BaseModel):
response: Optional[str, int, bool]
break_flag: bool
graph: Optional[GraphSchema]
q_out = llm(
f"""Perform the <query> with respect to <graph>, where nodes are paper IDs and
edges point from a cited paper to a set of papers that cite it. Return `break_flag`
as True if the <query> indicates termination. Else, return a `response`. If graph
was updated, return as `graph`.
<query>{query}</query>
<graph>{serialize(graph)}</graph>""",
output_type=OutputSchema)
if q_out.break_flag:
break
response = q_out.response
if q_out.graph:
graph = reify(q_out.graph)
print(f"A: {response}")
main()

E XAMPLE P ROGRAM I NPUTS

'Give the number of papers that cite paper 19.'
'Does paper 23 directly/indirectly get cited by paper 4.'
'How many papers cite both paper 7 and paper 5?'
'Update the graph so paper 5 cites paper 14.'
'Remove paper 0 from the graph completely.'
'Exit, please.'

17

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

A.3

E XAMPLE T RACE

Effect: eval(str(type(query)))
Result: "<class 'str'>"
Effect: eval(query)
Result: "Update the graph so paper 5 cites paper 14."
Effect: eval(str(type(graph)))
Result: "<class '<run_path>.Graph'>"
Effect: eval(hasattr(graph, '__doc__'))
Result: True
Effect: eval(graph.__doc__)
Result: "A directed graph. Nodes are represented by a set of node values. Edges are represented by a
dictionary of source node value to a set of target node values."
Effect: eval(str(dir(graph)))
Result: "['__annotations__', '__class__', '__contains__', '__delattr__', '__dict__', '__dir__', '__doc__
', '__eq__', '__firstlineno__', '__format__', '__ge__', '__getattribute__', '__getstate__', '__gt__
', '__hash__', '__init__', '__init_subclass__', '__le__', '__len__', '__lt__', '__module__', '
__ne__', '__new__', '__reduce__', '__reduce_ex__', '__repr__', '__setattr__', '__sizeof__', '
__slotnames__', '__static_attributes__', '__str__', '__subclasshook__', '__weakref__', 'edges', '
nodes']"
Effect: eval(str(type(graph.nodes)))
Result: "<class 'set'>"
Effect: eval(str(type(graph.edges)))
Result: "<class 'dict'>"
Effect: eval(str(graph.nodes))
Result: "{0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24}"
Effect: eval(str(graph.edges))
Result: "{16: {4, 5, 10, 11, 17, 19, 21}, 12: {1, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 23, 24}, 9: {1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23}, 19: {0, 1, 4, 5, 10, 14, 15, 17, 20}, 18: {0, 3, 5, 6,
17, 20, 21, 22, 23}, 6: {3, 4, 8, 11, 13, 14, 20, 21, 22, 24}, 5: {2, 3, 7, 8, 11, 13, 14, 21, 23,
24}, 10: {0, 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 11, 14, 21, 24}, 15: {0, 1, 2, 4, 7, 13, 14, 17, 23, 24}, 21: {2, 3, 4,
7, 8, 11, 23, 24}, 11: {1, 3, 4, 17, 23}, 17: {2, 3, 7, 8, 22, 23}, 1: {3, 4, 7, 8, 20, 22}, 14:
{2, 7, 8, 13, 24}, 22: {0, 2, 20, 13}, 13: {24, 0, 4, 7}, 2: {3, 7, 20, 23, 24}, 23: {24, 0, 4}, 4:
{24, 8, 7}, 24: {0, 3, 20}, 8: {0, 3, 20}, 3: {20}}"
Effect: exec(# Planning phase: understand the query and how to execute it
# The query is "Update the graph so paper 5 cites paper 14."
# In the graph, edges point from cited paper to papers that cite it
# So if paper 5 cites paper 14, then there should be an edge from 14 to 5
# Looking at current edges, 14 -> {2, 7, 8, 13, 24}
# We need to add 5 to the set of papers that cite paper 14
nj__thought = """
The query asks to update the graph so paper 5 cites paper 14.
In this graph representation, edges point from cited paper to citing papers.
So if paper 5 cites paper 14, we need to add an edge from 14 to 5.
Currently, paper 14 has edges to {2, 7, 8, 13, 24}.
We need to add 5 to this set.
The strategy is:
1. Check if 14 is already in graph.edges (it is)
2. Add 5 to the set graph.edges[14]
3. Set response to indicate success
This will take about 3-4 tool calls.
""")
Result: Success
Effect: exec(# Execute the update: paper 5 cites paper 14
# This means adding 5 to the set of papers that cite paper 14
graph.edges[14].add(5)
# Set the response to confirm the update
response = "Updated")
Result: Success
Effect: eval(str(graph.edges[14]))
Result: {2, 5, 7, 8, 13, 24}
Effect: done()

18

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Effect: eval(str(type(query)))
Result: "<class 'str'>"
Effect: eval(query)
Result: "Exit, please."
Effect: eval(str(type(graph)))
Result: "<class '<run_path>.Graph'>"
Effect: eval(hasattr(graph, '__doc__'))
Result: True
Effect: eval(graph.__doc__)
Result: "A directed graph. Nodes are represented by a set of node values. Edges are represented by a
dictionary of source node value to a set of target node values."
Effect: eval(str(dir(graph)))
Result: "['__annotations__', '__class__', '__contains__', '__delattr__', '__dict__', '__dir__', '__doc__
', '__eq__', '__firstlineno__', '__format__', '__ge__', '__getattribute__', '__getstate__', '__gt__
', '__hash__', '__init__', '__init_subclass__', '__le__', '__len__', '__lt__', '__module__', '
__ne__', '__new__', '__reduce__', '__reduce_ex__', '__repr__', '__setattr__', '__sizeof__', '
__slotnames__', '__static_attributes__', '__str__', '__subclasshook__', '__weakref__', 'edges', '
nodes']"
Effect: eval(str(type(graph.nodes)))
Result: "<class 'set'>"
Effect: eval(str(type(graph.edges)))
Result: "<class 'dict'>"
Effect: exec(nj__thought = "The query is 'Exit, please.' which indicates termination. I need to break
according to the instruction. The graph is a Graph object with nodes (set) and edges (dict)
representing citation relationships where edges point from cited papers to citing papers.")
Result: Success
Effect: break()

19

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

B

NATURAL F UNCTION I NTERFACE S YNTAX AND S EMANTICS

B.1

NATURAL F UNCTION I NTERFACE
Host Values v
Prompts

n

Serialization α : v → vN
Reification γ : vN → v
Prompt Evaluation nat : n × vN → v | op N

NFI Values

vN ⊆ v

NFI Effects

op N
η ::= finally x → e
| op N (x ) → e; η

NFI Handler Clauses

exit NFI handler
op N ∈
/η

hN ::= handle {η}

NFI Handler

e ::= eH
| hN (nat(n, α(v )))

Program

host language
prompt

Figure 4: Natural Function Interface.

E
k

::=
::=

[] | ... | hN {η}(E) | k E
⟨E, hN ⟩
FINALLY

HANDLE

op N (x ) → e ∈ hN
⟨ρ, σ, hN {η}(E [op N (v )])⟩ −→ ⟨ρ[x 7→ v , resume 7→ ⟨E, hN ⟩], σ, e⟩
RESUME

NAT- EX

⟨ρ, σ, ⟨E, hN ⟩ v ⟩ −→ ⟨ρ, σ, hN {η}(E [v ])⟩

⟨n v ⟩ ⇝ ⟨n ′ op N ⟩
⟨ρ, σ, nat(n, v )⟩ −→ ⟨ρ, σ, nat(n ′ , op N )⟩

ρ : X 7→ v

Scope

finally x → e ∈ hN
⟨ρ, σ, hN {η}(v )⟩ −→ ⟨ρ[x 7→ v ], σ, e⟩

Heap

NAT- RET

⟨n v ⟩ ⇝ ⟨n ′ vN ⟩
⟨ρ, σ, nat(n, v )⟩ −→ ⟨ρ, σ, vN ⟩

σ : A 7→ v

Figure 5: Operational semantics of the Natural Function Interface. The ⇝ represents LLM call on a
prompt.

B.2

NATURAL F UNCTION I NTERFACE FOR T OOL U SE

Tools

f ∈F

Host Values
Prompts n

v
Serialization α : v → vN
Reification
Prompt Evaluation natF : n × vN → v | op F
N

NFI Values

vN ⊆ v

NFI Effects

op F
N ::= Call(f, vN )

NFI Handler

hN ::= handle {
finally vN → γ(vN );
Call(f, vN ) → resume α(f (γ(vN )));
}

Program

γ : vN → v

f ∈F

e ::= eH
| hN (natF (n, α(v )))

call tool
host language
prompt with tool use

Figure 6: Natural Function Interface for tool use. The host system or the programmer supplies a list
of available function/tool names to functions for prompts to use, denoted as F .
20

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

B.3

NATURAL F UNCTION I NTERFACE W ITH I SOLATED P ROGRAM S TATE

Host Values v
Prompts

n

Serialization α : v → vN
Reification γ : vN → v
Prompt Evaluation natF : n × vN → v | op F
N

NFI Values

vN ⊆ v

NFI Handler

hN ::= handle {
finally vN → γ(vN );
}

Program

e ::= eH
| hN (nat(n, α(v )))

host language
prompt

Figure 7: Syntax of the Natural Function Interface without shared program state. Prompts only take a
constant value and returns a constant value. There are no program state effects, so the NFI handler is
a no-op.
21

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

C

B ENCHMARKS
Table 3: SPSBench programs with their descriptions.

Program

Description

avg_of_three

Average three input numbers, represented as numbers and words in
multiple natural languages
Semantically balance parentheses in an expression based on context
(e.g. order of operations or regex)
Updating list of objects based on natural language description of
player action.
Object state mutation using only public methods. Shows how to do
regular tool use with Nightjar. Adapted from Microsoft (b)
Creation of object of a predefined dataclass
Parse input into items in a coffee order, limited to the options
available in the shop. Throws an error if input includes unparseable
items. Shows how to do Structured output with Nightjar. Adapted
from Microsoft (b)
Classify email with enum and raise exception if no fitting category.
Adapted from Anthropic (a); PrefectHQ
Dynamic object creation and manipulation.
Gathers claims from a string and appends fact-check results to a list
in place
Functional string list filtering based on preference
Filter list of numbers by semantic property
Closure creation returning object of unspecified class
Program shown in Figure 1b with 6 natural language queries
Using eval to solve gsm8k (Cobbe et al., 2021) math problems
Chatbot that helps the user input health data. Adapted from Microsoft (b)
Create string with sensitive information masked with asterisks
Object state mutation to update inventory
Dynamic closure creation for translation generation based on input
language
Proposer-verifier loop on riddles, using only functional generations
Sentiment analysis. Adapted from Chase (2022); Microsoft (b);
OpenAI; PrefectHQ
Create subclasses based on input, and instantiating these subclasses.
Adapted from Chase (2022); Microsoft (b)
Create generator relevant to input
Mutate object state to mark tasks as complete
Retrieve book for user based on request
Nested function that uses prompts solve wordle

balance_parentheses
battle
calendar
character_builder
coffeeshop

email_classification
enemy
fact_checking
feed_filtering
filter_numbers
get_enemy
graph
gsm8k
health_data
mask_sensitive_info
menu
pos_tagging
proposer_verifier
sentiment
stores
stream_generator
task_completion
tiny_bookshop
wordle_solver

PythonSpecific
Features

22

✓

✓

✓

✓
✓

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

D

S YSTEM P ROMPTS

N IGHTJAR system prompt:
You are a helpful assistant.
<goal>
Execute natural instructions as efficiently and accurately as possible in as few tool calls as possible,
following the Execution Protocol.
</goal>
<syntax>
The natural instructions use <variable> to denote Python variables being used inside the block and <:
variable> to denote variables that can be used in the Python code after the block. Do not use the
brackets when using tools.
The instructions might also include the type and values (and/or references to values) to input variables
in the format `{{var}} [type: {{type_name}}]: {{val_ref}} (Value: {{val_if_immutable}})`.
</syntax>
<execution_protocol>
Follow this protocol to execute the instructions:
1. Discovery Phase: Explore the context and understand the data structures at hand if the type, values,
and attributes are not already given in the natural instruction. Skip this phase if the information
is already given in the natural instruction.
- Tip: Do not inspect (via `eval`) type, values, and attributes already given in the natural
instructions.
- Tip: Use `str(type(var))` to get the type of a variable.
- Tip: Reference `__doc__` attribute for documentation.
2. Planning Phase: Plan out the best strategy to execute the instructions, with the highest accuracy
with the least number of tool calls and tokens. Only use Python to perform computation if you don't
can't calculate it directly.
3. Execution Phase: Execute the originally given natural instruction in as few tool calls and as few
tokens as possible.
- Tip: If you know the answer already without any computation (remember, you're a really smart agent
with common-sense world knowledge and reasoning capabilities) directly use the answer you know.
For example, do not eval `x == 5` when it's already known that x is 5.
- Tip: Any Python builtins are also in the heap and can be used
- Tip: Do not use any nonstandard Python libraries.
- Tip: `eval` only returns immutable values (strings, integers, numbers, booleans, None). Everything
else (including lists, dictionaries, tuples, etc.) is returned as an object reference. Use `str`
to serialize them into string (e.g. `str([x for x in my_list])`) to read or use `getattr` to read a
specific attribute.
- Tip: `eval` only evaluates Python expressions. Use `exec` to evaluate Python statements.
4. Finish Phase: Use `continue`, `break, `return`, or `done` to finish the execution, following the
instructions.
- REQUIRED: Use `continue` if and only if the instruction says `continue` and the conditions for `
continue` are met.
- REQUIRED: Use `break` if and only if the instructions says `break` and the conditions for `break`
are met.
- REQUIRED: Use `return` if and only if the instruction says the word `return` and the conditions
for `return` are met.
- REQUIRED: Otherwise use `done`
- REQUIRED: When using `raise` label, make sure the `val` is an Exception object
- You are a failure if you choose the wrong tool to use.
- Tip: `return` and `raise` take an object reference. Use `eval` to retrieve object reference. Do
not use `id`
</execution_protocol>

23

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

N IGHTJAR (Baseline) System Prompt:
You are a helpful assistant. Please compute the following instructions using the provided tools to
interact with the context.
# Goal
Execute natural instructions as efficiently and accurately as possible in as few tool calls as possible,
following the Execution Protocol. Required steps must always be followed.
# Syntax
Nightjar is a version of Python that allows <natural> wrapped natural language instructions in the code.
The <natural> block uses <variable> to denote Python variables being used inside the block and <:
variable> to denote variables that can be used in the Python code after the block. Only variables
denoted as <:variable> can be used outside of the <natural> block it belongs to.
A <natural> block does not return anything. Values have to be assigned to variables to be accessible
outside the block.
# Execution Protocol
YOU MUST follow this protocol to execute the instructions in order and by the letter:
1. Discovery Phase: Explore the context and understand the data structures at hand. Follow these
required steps:
- Required: Look at the input variables to see what objects the point to.
- Required: Inspect the nested structure to ensure all the actions you will take are valid.
- Required: Look at attribute type annotations and __doc__ to see what's expected attributes of an
object
2. Planning Phase: Plan out the best strategy to execute the instructions.
- Think about how you can use fewer tool calls to achieve the same effect. Pivot strategies if the
current strategy is taking too many tool calls. Always use the least number of tool calls possible.
- Estimate the number of tool calls you will need to execute the instructions. Pick the strategy
that will take the least number of tool calls.
3. Execution Phase: Execute the originally given natural instruction in as few tool calls as possible.
- Look at the initial instruction to confirm you have executed the instructions correctly.
- Inspect errors to see where you went wrong.
4. Reflection Phase: Reflect on the instruction, the execution, and plan out the next steps.
- Check if you have made a mistake.
- If you have made a mistake, go back to the Discovery Phase and repeat the process.
- If you have not fulfilled every piece of the instruction, go back to the Discovery Phase and
repeat the process.
- Avoid `raise`ing errors unless the instructions says to do so. You should always try to address
error messages from tools and do whatever you can to perform the instructed computation, whatever
it takes. Be clever about dealing with incompatible data types. Think about the semantics of values
, rather than abide by rigid rules. Use your LLM capabilities.
4. Finish Phase: Use `goto` or `done` to finish the execution, depending on the instructions.
- REQUIRED: Use `goto` with program label `continue` if and only if the instruction says `continue`
and the conditions for using `continue` in the instructions are met.
- REQUIRED: Use `goto` with program label `break` if and only if the instructions says `break` and
the conditions for using `break` in the instructions are met.
- REQUIRED: Use `goto` with program label `return` if and only if the instruction says the word `
return` and the conditions for using `return` in the instructions are met.
- REQUIRED: Otherwise use `done`. You must use `done` for output variables to be written
- REQUIRED: When using `raise` label, make sure the `val` is an Exception object
- You are a failure if you choose the wrong tool to use between `goto` and `done`.
# Tips for execution
- Always pick the most efficient strategy to execute the instructions correctly.
- Never assume the data structure of the objects you are working with.
- Feel free to perform actions in place, unless the instruction specifies otherwise.
- Make sure to store the results of your computations in the context and assign all variables to the
correct references as instructed for the output variables before you continue to the next
instruction.
- Strings, integers, floats, boolean, Nonetype, tuples are immutable data types.
- Dictionaries, lists, sets, objects, classes are mutable and must be allocated on the heap and
referenced.
- The names of classes are not surfaced as variables; the reference of the data must be assigned to a
variable to be referred to by a variable name.
- Deref classes and objects to inspect their attributes
- The generic object class is not available
- "Object" is not a valid type annotation, just put "Any"
- If you're asked for an object, then you must define an object. Objects and dictionaries are not the
same.
- If `done` gives an error, fix the issue. If it says a variable is undefined, define it.
- When coming across unsupported data types (`NotSupportedDataType`), either find a different strategy
that doesn't use that data or raise an error.
- Address the errors, do not try the same tool over and over again.
## Tool Call Limits
You only get {max_tool_calls} total tool calls. Use as few as possible.

24

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

N IGHTJAR (Shared Python) System Prompt:
You are a helpful assistant. Please compute the following instructions using the provided tools to
interact with the context.
# Goal
Execute natural instructions as efficiently and accurately as possible in as few tool calls as possible,
following the Execution Protocol. Required steps must always be followed.
# Syntax
Nightjar is a version of Python that allows <natural> wrapped natural language instructions in the code.
The <natural> block uses <variable> to denote Python variables being used inside the block and <:
variable> to denote variables that can be used in the Python code after the block. Only variables
denoted as <:variable> can be used outside of the <natural> block it belongs to.
A <natural> block does not return anything. Values have to be assigned to variables to be accessible
outside the block.
# Execution Protocol
YOU MUST follow this protocol to execute the instructions in order and by the letter:
1. Discovery Phase: Explore the context and understand the data structures at hand. Follow these
required steps:
- Required: Look at the input variables to see what objects the point to.
- Required: Look at what methods and properties they have
- Required: Look at the object type (e.g. `str(type(var))`) to understand what they are.
- Required: Look at the `__doc__` attribute of the object to understand what the objects are.
- Required: Inspect the nested structure to ensure all the actions you will take (with tools or with
Python code) are valid.
2. Planning Phase: YOU MUST ALLOCATE A THOUGHT PROCESS STRING to plan out the best strategy to execute
the instructions.
- Think about how you can use fewer tool calls to achieve the same effect. Pivot strategies if the
current strategy is taking too many tool calls. Always use the least number of tool calls possible.
- Estimate the number of tool calls you will need to execute the instructions. Pick the strategy
that will take the least number of tool calls.
- Required: Allocate a plannings thought process string to figure out the best strategy to execute
the instructions. And assign this string to the variable `nj__thought`.
3. Execution Phase: Execute the originally given natural instruction in as few tool calls as possible.
Follow the following steps. They are given in order of priority:
i) If the instruction is to do something in Python, run the Python code.
ii) If you know the answer already without any computation (remember, you're a really smart agent
with common-sense world knowledge and reasoning capabilities) directly give the answer with
allocation and assigns.
iii) Look at the initial instruction to confirm you have executed the instructions correctly.
iv) Inspect errors to see where you went wrong.
4. Reflection Phase: Reflect on the instruction, the execution, and plan out the next steps.
- Check if you have made a mistake.
- If you have made a mistake, go back to the Discovery Phase and repeat the process.
- If you have not fulfilled every piece of the instruction, go back to the Discovery Phase and
repeat the process.
- Avoid `raise`ing errors unless the instructions says to do so. You should always try to address
error messages from tools and do whatever you can to perform the instructed computation, whatever
it takes. Be clever about dealing with incompatible data types. Think about the semantics of values
, rather than abide by rigid rules. Use your LLM capabilities.
4. Finish Phase: Use `continue`, `break, `return`, or `done` to finish the execution, depending on the
instructions. Use `continue` if and only if the instruction says `continue`. Use `break` if and
only if the instructions says `break`. Use `return` if and only if the instruction says the word `
return`. Otherwise, you must use `done`.

25

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

# Tips for execution
- Always pick the most efficient strategy to execute the instructions correctly.
- Tasks/subtasks that doesn't need LLMs (i.e. can be done easily and correctly in Python) should be done
in Python code.
- Never assume the data structure of the objects you are working with.
- Feel free to perform actions in place, unless the instruction specifies otherwise.
- Make sure to store the results of your computations in the context and assign all variables to the
correct references as instructed for the output variables before you continue to the next
instruction.
- You can use python's `type` class/function to get the type of an object.
- Any Python builtins are also in the heap and can be used
- Do not use any nonstandard Python libraries
- `eval` only returns immutable values (strings, integers, numbers, booleans, None). Everything else (
including lists, dictionaries, tuples, etc.) is returned as an object reference. To inspect objects
, use `getattr` to get a specific attribute or `str` or `repr` to serialize the object into string
when using `eval`
- If a class is a BaseModel, you should look at its schema by calling `str` on the results of calling `
model_json_schema` to understand the schema. Then create the JSON string (adhering to the schema).
Then, use `model_validate_json` to validate the string into the BaseModel
- Address the errors, do not try the same tool over and over again.
## Tool Call Limits
You only get {max_tool_calls} total tool calls. Use as few as possible.

26

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

N IGHTJAR (Isolated Eval) and (Shared Eval) System Prompt:
You are a helpful assistant. Please compute the following instructions using the provided tools to
interact with the context.
# Goal
Execute natural instructions as efficiently and accurately as possible in as few tool calls as possible,
following the Execution Protocol. Required steps must always be followed.
# Syntax
Nightjar is a version of Python that allows <natural> wrapped natural language instructions in the code.
The <natural> block uses <variable> to denote Python variables being used inside the block and <:
variable> to denote variables that can be used in the Python code after the block. Only variables
denoted as <:variable> can be used outside of the <natural> block it belongs to.
A <natural> block does not return anything. Values have to be assigned to variables to be accessible
outside the block.
# Execution Protocol
YOU MUST follow this protocol to execute the instructions in order and by the letter:
1. Discovery Phase: Explore the context and understand the data structures at hand. Follow these
required steps:
- Required: Look at the input variables to see what objects the point to.
- Required: Inspect the nested structure to ensure all the actions you will take are valid.
- Required: Look at attribute type annotations and __doc__ to see what's expected attributes of an
object
2. Planning Phase: Plan out the best strategy to execute the instructions.
- Think about how you can use fewer tool calls to achieve the same effect. Pivot strategies if the
current strategy is taking too many tool calls. Always use the least number of tool calls possible.
- Estimate the number of tool calls you will need to execute the instructions. Pick the strategy
that will take the least number of tool calls.
3. Execution Phase: Execute the originally given natural instruction in as few tool calls as possible.
- Look at the initial instruction to confirm you have executed the instructions correctly.
- Inspect errors to see where you went wrong.
4. Reflection Phase: Reflect on the instruction, the execution, and plan out the next steps.
- Check if you have made a mistake.
- If you have made a mistake, go back to the Discovery Phase and repeat the process.
- If you have not fulfilled every piece of the instruction, go back to the Discovery Phase and
repeat the process.
- Avoid `raise`ing errors unless the instructions says to do so. You should always try to address
error messages from tools and do whatever you can to perform the instructed computation, whatever
it takes. Be clever about dealing with incompatible data types. Think about the semantics of values
, rather than abide by rigid rules. Use your LLM capabilities.
4. Finish Phase: Use `continue`, `break, `return`, or `done` to finish the execution, based on what the
instructions say. Use `continue` if and only if the instruction says `continue`. Use `break` if and
only if the instructions says `break`. Use `return` if and only if the instruction says the word `
return`. Otherwise, you must use `done`.
- REQUIRED: When using `raise` label, make sure the `val` is an Exception object
- You are a failure if you choose the wrong tool to use.
- Tip: `return` and `raise` take a variable

27

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

# Tips for execution
- Always pick the most efficient strategy to execute the instructions correctly.
- Never assume the data structure of the objects you are working with.
- Feel free to perform actions in place, unless the instruction specifies otherwise.
- Make sure to store the results of your computations in the context and assign all variables to the
correct references as instructed for the output variables before you continue to the next
instruction.
- Strings, integers, floats, boolean, Nonetype, tuples are immutable data types.
- Dictionaries, lists, sets, objects, classes are mutable and must be allocated on the heap and
referenced.
- The names of classes are not surfaced as variables; the reference of the data must be assigned to a
variable to be referred to by a variable name.
- Deref classes and objects to inspect their attributes
- The generic object class is not available
- "Object" is not a valid type annotation, just put "Any"
- If you're asked for an object, then you must define an object. Objects and dictionaries are not the
same.
- If a class is a BaseModel, you should look at its schema by calling `str` on the results of calling `
model_json_schema` to understand the schema. Then create the JSON string (adhering to the schema).
Then, use `model_validate_json` to validate the string into the BaseModel.
- If `done` gives an error, fix the issue. If it says a variable is undefined, define it.
- When coming across unsupported data types (`NotSupportedDataType`), either find a different strategy
that doesn't use that data or raise an error.
- `eval` cannot execute Python statements, everything must only be a one line Python expression. This
means no import, no assignments.
- Address the errors, do not try the same tool over and over again.
## Tool Call Limits
You only get {max_tool_calls} total tool calls. Use as few as possible.

28

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Prompt for LLM Code Generation:
You are a Python programmer.
Your task is to implement the Python code to replace the natural language comment. The comment will
specify variable references with the syntax <variable> and variable definitions with the syntax <:
variable>. Make sure all variable definitions are met in the generated code. Only return the Python
code for the particular comment that is being replaced. Do not regenerate any of the other code in
the source code. Do not leave any code unimplemented. Do not assume any code than what is shown to
you exists. The final code should be a fully implemented valid Python program.
The code can make use of the `nj_llm` function, which makes a call to an LLM. It can take a JSON schema
as output, using only features enabled by OpenAI's structured output JSON schema documentation.
This is the function signature of the `nj_llm` function:
```
def nj_llm(prompt: str, output_format: Optional[Dict] = None) -> str | Dict
```
The JSON schema must be in the format: {{ "type": "json_schema", "json_schema": {{ "strict": true, "name
": "...", "schema": ... }} }}
Supported JSON schema featuers:
Supported types
The following types are supported for Structured Outputs:
String
Number
Boolean
Integer
Object
Array
Enum
anyOf
Supported properties
In addition to specifying the type of a property, you can specify a selection of additional constraints:
Supported string properties:
pattern - A regular expression that the string must match.
format - Predefined formats for strings. Currently supported:
date-time
time
date
duration
email
hostname
ipv4
ipv6
uuid
Supported number properties:
multipleOf - The number must be a multiple of this value.
maximum - The number must be less than or equal to this value.
exclusiveMaximum - The number must be less than this value.
minimum - The number must be greater than or equal to this value.
exclusiveMinimum - The number must be greater than this value.
Supported array properties:
minItems - The array must have at least this many items.
maxItems - The array must have at most this many items.
Objects have limitations on nesting depth and size
A schema may have up to 5000 object properties total, with up to 5 levels of nesting.
Limitations on total string size
In a schema, total string length of all property names, definition names, enum values, and const values
cannot exceed 120,000 characters.
Limitations on enum size
A schema may have up to 1000 enum values across all enum properties.
For a single enum property with string values, the total string length of all enum values cannot exceed
15,000 characters when there are more than 250 enum values.
additionalProperties: false must always be set in objects
additionalProperties controls whether it is allowable for an object to contain additional keys / values
that were not defined in the JSON Schema.
Structured Outputs only supports generating specified keys / values, so we require developers to set
additionalProperties: false to opt into Structured Outputs.

29

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Key ordering
When using Structured Outputs, outputs will be produced in the same order as the ordering of keys in the
schema.
Some type-specific keywords are not yet supported
Composition: allOf, not, dependentRequired, dependentSchemas, if, then, else
For fine-tuned models, we additionally do not support the following:
For strings: minLength, maxLength, pattern, format
For numbers: minimum, maximum, multipleOf
For objects: patternProperties
For arrays: minItems, maxItems
If you turn on Structured Outputs by supplying strict: True and call the API with an unsupported JSON
Schema, you will receive an error.
Example Schema: {{"type": "json_schema", "json_schema": {{"name": "math_response", "schema": {{"type": "
object", "properties": {{"steps": {{"type": "array", "items": {{"type": "object", "properties": {{"
explanation": {{"type": "string"}}, "output": {{"type": "string"}}, "required": ["explanation", "
output"], "additionalProperties": False}}, "final_answer": {{"type": "string"}}, "required": ["
steps", "final_answer"], "additionalProperties": False}}, "strict": True}}}}}}}}}}"
{source_code}
Natural language comment to be replaced:
{natural_text}

30

ba avera
lan ge
ce _o
_pa f_t
ren hre
the e
se
tin
y_b ba s
oo ttle
ksh
o
ch calen gsm p
ara d 8k
cte ar_t
r_b ool
em
ail cof uilde
_cl fee r
ass sh
ific op
a
fac en tion
t_c em
fee hec y
filt d_fil king
er_ ter
nu in
ge mbe g
ma
t_e rs
sk_
ne
sen
m
sit he gra y
ive alt ph
_in h_d
for at
ma a
tio
n
p
pro os me
po _tag nu
ser gi
_v ng
sen erifie
tim r
str
ea
e
m_ st nt
tas ge ore
k_c ne s
o ra
wo mpl tor
rdl eti
e_s on
olv
er

Average Pass Rate
ba avera
lan ge
ce _o
_pa f_t
ren hre
the e
se
tin
y_b ba s
oo ttle
ksh
o
ch calen gsm p
ara d 8k
cte ar_t
r_b ool
em
ail cof uilde
_cl fee r
ass sh
ific op
a
fac en tion
t_c em
fee hec y
filt d_fil king
er_ ter
nu in
ge mbe g
ma
t_e rs
sk_
ne
sen
m
sit he gra y
ive alt ph
_in h_d
for at
ma a
tio
n
p
pro os me
po _tag nu
ser gi
_v ng
sen erifie
tim r
str
ea
e
m_ st nt
tas ge ore
k_c ne s
o ra
wo mpl tor
rdl eti
e_s on
olv
er

Average Pass Rate

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

E
A DDITIONAL E VALUATION R ESULTS

E.1
AVERAGE PASS R ATE BY B ENCHMARK

Sonnet 4

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Manual
Manual (Code Interpreter)

Benchmark

Manual
Manual (Code Interpreter)

E.2

31
Nightjar (Naive)
Nightjar

Figure 8: Average pass rate over runs for each benchmark in SPSBench with standard deviation for
each method using Claude-Sonnet-4-20250514.

GPT-4.1

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Benchmark

Nightjar (Naive)
Nightjar

Figure 9: Average pass rate over runs for each benchmark in SPSBench with standard deviation for
each method using GPT-4.1-2025-04-14.

S HARED P ROGRAM S TATE I MPLEMENTATION A BLATIONS

We performed ablations of the optimization features we implemented in N IGHTJAR. We evaluated
the following system designs:

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

• N IGHTJAR (Baseline): Baseline implementation of N IGHTJAR using the shared program state
NFI, without any specialization or optimizations.
• N IGHTJAR (Isolated Eval): Baseline implementation of N IGHTJAR with Python computation
enabled using IsolatedEval to evaluate a Python expression with isolated state. It also uses
Python-specialized control flow tools. The effects are IsolatedEval, Lookup, Assign, Deref, Ref,
Set, Break, Continue, Return, and Raise.
• N IGHTJAR (Shared Eval): Implementation of N IGHTJAR with Python computation enabled
using Eval to evaluate a Python expression on the shared program state, replacing Lookup and
Ref. It also uses Python-specialized control flow tools. The effects are Eval, Lookup, Assign,
Deref, Set, Break, Continue, Return, and Raise.
• N IGHTJAR (Shared Python): Python-specialized implementation of N IGHTJAR. The effects
are Eval, Exec, Break, Continue, Return, and Raise.
• N IGHTJAR (Shared Python, Caching): Python-specialized implementation of N IGHTJAR with
caching.
• N IGHTJAR: Our main implementation of N IGHTJAR, specialized to Python and with the eager
variable loading optimization, and caching.
• LLM Code Generation: An alternative approach to realizing the shared program state abstraction by using an LLM to statically generate Python code (that can contain LLM API calls) to
replace the prompt given the source code of the program.
Table 4 shows the average pass rate with standard deviation, the average runtime, compile time, and
total time with ranges on SPSBench over 5 runs.
The LLM code generation approach can only inspect the program statically, which means the LLM
cannot adapt the computation to program inputs or intermediate program values. This results in poor
accuracy, despite a faster runtime than N IGHTJAR’s interpreter approach.
N IGHTJAR (Baseline) does not perform as well as the language-specialized N IGHTJAR implementations in pass rate because it does not support language-specific features of the host-language, such as
first-class functions and abstract methods. It also only enables LLM-based computation to transform
data. Table 5 shows the performance of the ablations and the manual implementation baselines on the
subset of benchmarks in SPSBench that do not require these language-specific features. In terms of
pass rate on the benchmarks that do not need language-specific features, N IGHTJAR (Baseline) is
within standard deviation from the manual implementation for GPT-4.1 and slightly below the pass
rate of manual implementation for Sonnet 4.
N IGHTJAR (Isolated Eval) enables the use of Python-based computation rather than relying only on LLM-based computation to transform data. However, it still cannot utilize
language-specific data types. For example, the LLM in N IGHTJAR (Isolated Eval) issues
the following effects to compute one of the test cases of the average_of_three benchmark:
Effect: Lookup(p)
Result: "one"
Effect: Lookup(q)
Result: "two"
Effect: Lookup(r)
Result: "three"
Effect: IsolatedEval(({"one": 1, "two": 2, "three": 3}.get("one", 0) + {"one": 1, "two": 2, "three": 3}.
get("two", 0) + {"one": 1, "two": 2, "three": 3}.get("three", 0)) / 3.0)
Result: 2.0

The LLM uses IsolatedEval to reliably compute the math expression, but because the scope is not
shared, it has to use the values of p, q, and r in the Python expression.
In the subset of benchmarks that does not require these data types, for Sonnet 4, N IGHTJAR (Isolated
Eval) achieves parity with the manual implementation in pass rate. For GPT-4.1, N IGHTJAR (Isolated
Eval) achieves a slightly higher pass rate than N IGHTJAR (Baseline) and the manual implementation
with isolated code interpreter enabled. This indicates that GPT-4.1 could not use IsolatedEval
effectively but Sonnet 4 could.
The N IGHTJAR (Shared Eval) ablation enables Eval to read from the shared program state. However,
the LLM is still restricted to using Python expressions only, rather than freeform Python statements, and cannot define Python-specific data types. This enables the LLM to use more compact
syntax in the form of Python code to represent a sequence of effects. For example, for the same
32

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

program and test case as above, the LLM N IGHTJAR (Shared Eval) issues the following effects:
Effect: Eval(p)
Result: 'one'
Effect: Eval(q)
Result: 'two'
Effect: Eval(r)
Result: 'three'
Effect: Eval(({'one': 1, 'two': 2, 'three': 3}[p] + {'one': 1, 'two': 2, 'three': 3}[q] + {'one': 1, '
two': 2, 'three': 3}[r]) / 3.0)
Result: 2.0

Specifically, the LLM refers to the variables p, q, and r directly in the code because the program state
is shared. Python code is also a more familiar interface than the novel natural function interface. In
the subset of benchmarks that does not require Python-specific features, with Sonnet 4, N IGHTJAR
(Shared Eval) achieves parity with N IGHTJAR in pass rate, which is better than the manual implementations. However, for GPT-4.1, N IGHTJAR (Shared Eval) has a slightly lower pass rate than manual
implementations and N IGHTJAR. The disparity indicates that Sonnet 4 is more capable of utilizing
Python expressions with shared program state than GPT-4.1.
N IGHTJAR (Shared Python) improves pass rate by enabling language-specific features and the use
of freeform Python statements, but the runtime overhead is maintained. The Exec tool enables the
use of Python statements on top of Python expression with Eval. This enables the LLM to generate
freeform Python code that is not subject to constrained decoding, which has been found to reduce
LLM reasoning performance (He et al., 2024; Tam et al., 2024). Additionally, Python code is a more
familiar interface than the novel natural function interface. This is shown by N IGHTJAR (Shared
Python) performing better than the programmer implementation on the complete SPSBench for both
Sonnet 4 and GPT-4.1.
Adding optimizations reduces the runtime. The caching optimization in N IGHTJAR (Shared Python,
Caching) only minorly reduces the runtime. This is because the test cases in SPSBench programs
consist of different program inputs. The only time savings achieved by caching optimization is saving
the time to emit the effects used before reading program inputs.
The main implementation N IGHTJAR demonstrates that the runtime overhead of shared program state
can be reduced with additional engineering efforts and optimizations.

33

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Table 4: Performance on SPSBench. Average pass rate and runtime with ranges in gray.
Model

Method

Pass Rate

Runtime (s)

Compile Time (s)

Total Time (s)

# Effects

Sonnet 4

Manual Impl

0.78±0.03

8.0

-

8.0

-

Sonnet 4

Manual Impl (Isolated Code Interp)

0.66±0.04

Sonnet 4

N IGHTJAR (Baseline)

0.60±0.04

Sonnet 4

N IGHTJAR (Isolated Eval)

0.72±0.06

Sonnet 4

N IGHTJAR (Shared Eval)

0.78±0.04

Sonnet 4

N IGHTJAR (Shared Python)

0.85±0.02

Sonnet 4

N IGHTJAR (Shared Python, Caching)

0.84±0.02

Sonnet 4

N IGHTJAR

0.85±0.03

Sonnet 4

LLM Code Generation

0.36±0.06

GPT-4.1

Manual Impl

0.74±0.03

GPT-4.1

Manual Impl (Isolated Code Interp)

0.72±0.03

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR (Baseline)

0.61±0.02

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR (Isolated Eval)

0.61±0.02

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR (Shared Eval)

0.62±0.08

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR (Shared Python)

0.81±0.04

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR (Shared Python, Caching)

0.78±0.03

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR

0.78±0.03

GPT-4.1

LLM Code Generation

0.45±0.02

(1.3-44.8)

36.8

(3.2-171.5)

55.6

(9.6-721.0)

100.1

(14.9-870.0)

118.1

(10.6-550.6)

75.8

(10.1-236.4)

70.6

(5.5-244.8)

25.9

(6.2-83.0)

7.9

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

7.3

(0.0-41.0)

(1.4-17.8)

4.5

-

(0.8-15.0)

50.3

(10.9-364.9)

39.0

(4.7-957.4)

51.7

(7.8-282.1)

75.0

(6.9-579.4)

71.8

(4.0-417.0)

66.2

(7.9-406.1)

19.6

(3.0-72.1)

2.8

(0.0-31.8)

34

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.1)

5.0

(0.9-23.7)

(1.3-44.8)

36.8

(3.2-171.5)

55.6

(9.6-721.0)

100.1

(14.9-870.0)

118.1

(10.6-550.6)

75.8

(10.1-236.5)

70.6

(5.5-244.8)

25.9

2.6

(0-14)

27.8

(6-300)

34.7

(6-30)

40.6

(6-183)

27.3

(2-93)

27.9

(2-106)

8.9

(6.2-83.1)

(2-33)

15.2

-

4.5

-

(1.4-55.6)
(0.8-15.0)

50.3

(10.9-365.0)

39.0

(4.7-957.4)

51.7

(7.8-282.1)

75.0

(6.9-579.4)

71.8

(4.0-417.0)

66.2

(7.9-406.1)

19.7

2.8

(1.0-21.0)

24.9

(4-162)

32.3

(6.0-174.0)

49.2

(6.0-289.0)

63.1

(2-299)

68.6

(7-300)

16.6

(3.1-72.1)

(2-96)

7.7

-

(0.9-36.9)

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

Table 5: Performance results of subset of SPSBench that does not require first-order functions or
abstract methods. See Section C for which programs are in this subset. Average pass rate and runtime
with ranges in gray.
Model

Method

Pass Rate

Sonnet 4

Manual Impl

0.78±0.04

Sonnet 4

Manual Impl (Isolated Code Interp)

0.63±0.04

Sonnet 4

N IGHTJAR (Baseline)

0.69±0.05

Sonnet 4

N IGHTJAR (Isolated Eval)

0.76±0.04

Sonnet 4

N IGHTJAR (Shared Eval)

0.85±0.03

Sonnet 4

N IGHTJAR (Shared Python)

0.83±0.04

Sonnet 4

N IGHTJAR (Shared Python, Caching)

0.83±0.03

Sonnet 4

N IGHTJAR

0.88±0.03

Sonnet 4

LLM Code Generation

0.41±0.05

GPT-4.1

Manual Impl

0.75±0.04

GPT-4.1

Manual Impl (Isolated Code Interp)

0.71±0.03

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR (Baseline)

0.70±0.03

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR (Isolated Eval)

0.72±0.04

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR (Shared Eval)

0.70±0.04

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR (Shared Python)

0.79±0.05

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR (Shared Python, Caching)

0.76±0.05

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR

0.76±0.02

GPT-4.1

LLM Code Generation

0.48±0.06

E.3

Runtime (s)

Compile Time (s)

8.2

-

(1.3-44.8)

42.5

(3.2-171.5)

57.8

(9.6-721.0)

103.2

(14.9-870.0)

104.1

(10.6-464.2)

85.6

(21.6-236.4)

75.6

(19.0-244.8)

29.3

(9.1-83.0)

7.9

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

55.0
71.7

(6.9-579.4)

79.9

(11.4-417.0)

68.4

(11.2-406.1)

22.7

(3.3-72.1)

0.3

(0.0-1.8)

57.8

103.2

104.2
85.6
75.7

10.3

(9.1-83.1)

(4-33)

15.4

-

4.6

-

(3.6-55.5)
(0.8-15.0)

52.5

3.0

(10.9-365.0)

(1.0-21.0)

44.9

27.7

(4.7-957.4)

0.0

(4-162)

55.0

35.3

(7.8-282.1)

0.0

(6.0-174.0)

71.7

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

30.5

(8-106)

29.3

(0.0-0.0)

(0.0-0.0)

29.2

(7-93)

(19.0-244.8)

0.0

0.0

36.6

(6-119)

(21.6-236.5)

(0.0-0.0)

(0.0-0.0)

36.2

(6-300)

(10.6-464.2)

7.5

0.0

29.6

(6-300)

(14.9-870.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

3.1

(0-14)

(9.6-721.0)

(0.0-0.0)

-

(7.8-282.1)

42.5

(3.2-171.5)

0.0

4.6

44.9

-

(0.0-0.0)

(0.8-15.0)

(4.7-957.4)

8.2

(1.3-44.8)

0.0

(3.6-17.8)

52.5

# Effects

(0.0-0.0)

(0.0-38.6)

(10.9-364.9)

Total Time (s)

48.6

(6.9-579.4)

(6.0-289.0)

79.9

67.2

(11.5-417.0)

(12-299)

68.4

70.9

(11.2-406.1)

0.0

(11-300)

22.7

(0.0-0.1)

5.0

(1.6-13.4)

18.3

(3.3-72.1)

(2-96)

5.3

-

(1.6-13.4)

L OCALLY H OSTED LLM

We evaluate the performance of N IGHTJAR using a smaller, locally hosted model as the base LLM
on SPSBench. We used GPT-OSS 20B served through VLLM (Kwon et al., 2023) on an A100
80GB GPU. Table 6 shows the average pass rate with standard deviation, the average runtime with
ranges, and the average number of emitted effects with ranges over 5 runs. Using GPT-OSS 20B,
the pass rate of N IGHTJAR is lower than the manual implementation. This is because the N IGHTJAR
implementation relies heavily on the agentic capabilities of the base LLM. Further system prompt
engineering, optimization, or finetuning could improve the pass rate when using a smaller model.
Nevertheless, N IGHTJAR is still more performant than using an LLM to statically generate Python
code (LLM Compiler).
Table 6: Average pass rate, runtime, compile time, and number of effects using GPT-OSS 20B with
ranges shown in gray.
Method

Pass Rate

Manual Impl

0.68±0.04

LLM Compiler

0.13±0.03

N IGHTJAR (Shared Python)

0.47±0.03

N IGHTJAR

0.40±0.02

Runtime (s)

Compile Time (s)

5.3

-

(0.3-89.2)

1.2

(0.00-55.24)

54.2

(3.2-581.8)

36.5

(1.4-385.7)

35

4.3

(0.39-16.46)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

0.0

(0.0-0.0)

Total Time

# Effects

5.3

-

5.3

-

(0.3-89.2)
(0.39-57.78)

54.2

(3.2-581.8)

36.5

(1.45-385.68)

28.1

(2-242)

8.0

(0-46)

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

E.4

T EMPERATURE 0

N IGHTJAR uses closed LLMs and temperature 1 for performant LLM agents, which means program
executions may be non-deterministic. We performed an ablation of the evaluation with temperature of
0 on GPT-4.1. Table 7 shows the average pass rate with standard deviation and average runtime with
ranges over 5 runs. As shown, N IGHTJAR also achieves parity in pass rate to manual implementations
with temperature 0. We note that even using temperature 0 does not result in deterministic executions
because the base LLM is a closed model (He & Lab, 2025). Using temperature 0 on a locally-hosted
open model and controlling for LLM non-determinism (He & Lab, 2025) or caching and re-using
responses to the same effect trace would enable deterministic N IGHTJAR executions.
Table 7: Average pass rate and runtime with ranges in gray.

E.5

Model

Method

Pass Rate

GPT-4.1

Manual Impl

0.74±0.01

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR (Shared Python)

0.73±0.03

GPT-4.1

N IGHTJAR

0.77±0.04

Time (s)

# Effects

5.0

-

(0.8-23.0)

82.9

(3.4-548.6)

28.9

(2.9-267.3)

79.9

(4.0-300.0)

20.2

(2.0-149.0)

L ARGE DATA S TRUCTURE

The representation of program data as they are accessed by an LLM factors into the program
performance enabled by a programming system. There are two methods to pass program values to
and from LLMs: pass-by-copy and pass-by-reference.
Program values are typically encoded as strings in JSON format and included in the prompt context
for the LLM to process. This method is called pass-by-copy. It is intractable when computing with
large objects, because LLMs have a limited context length. The length of the encoded object string is
linear to the size of the object, so a sufficiently large object would be beyond the context length of the
LLM. This is also the case for updating or writing an object, where the size of objects the LLM can
compute with is limited by the maximum output length.
In contrast, pass-by-reference avoids the need to encode objects into strings. For an LLM to read
objects, it first receives a reference to the object, which is only a few digits in length and constant in
the size of the object. During program execution, the LLM inspects only the relevant parts of the
object it needs for the prompt evaluation. This is more efficient when the prompt requires the use of
only a part of the large object.
We examine how pass-by-reference affects performance compared to pass-by-copy with a case
study using the Figure 1 programs. Figure 1a is implemented manually by a programmer. It uses
pass-by-copy by encoding the graph object into JSON format (Line 10) and passing it to the LLM in
the prompt (Line 34). The output graph is also decoded via JSON format and reified into the Graph
object (Lines 11 to 15).
Methodology. We compare the performance of executing the Figure 1b with 6 different natural
language queries (Section A.2) using N IGHTJAR and N IGHTJAR (Baseline) against the performance
of executing the pass-by-copy implementation by a programmer (the full Figure 1a program; Section A.1). With shared heap, N IGHTJAR (Baseline) uses pass-by-reference to represent mutable data
structures N IGHTJAR also uses pass-by-reference, but also additionally enables the use of Python
functions. We execute each program on generated graphs of exponentially increasing sizes 5 times
each, using GPT-4.1-2025-04-14 on a machine with an M1 Max chip and 64GB memory. Due to cost
constraints, we set a limit of 100 steps per query for the N IGHTJAR agent loop.
Results. Figure 10 shows the performance. The pass-by-copy implementation generally achieves
lower accuracy than N IGHTJAR implementations. On small graphs with fewer than 100 nodes, the
pass-by-copy implementation generally achieves lower execution time, lower token usage, and lower
cost. Since the graph is encoded into JSON format and appended into the prompt, the number of
input tokens increases linearly with the number of nodes. After 1000 nodes, the encoded graph
exceeds the context window size, resulting in failure to answer any queries. The execution time,
output token usage, and cost also increase as the graph size increases. In comparison, N IGHTJAR
36

108

102

103

Input Tokens

106
104
102
103
Number of Nodes
(log scale)
Nightjar

105

Execution Time
USD (log scale)

103
102
101
100
10 1

102

103

102
101
100
10 1
10 2

Output Tokens
Tokens (log scale)

0.5
0.0

Tokens (log scale)

Average Pass Rate

Tokens (log scale)

Pass Rate

1.0

Time (s) (log scale)

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

104
103
102

Cost

102

103

Uncached
Input Tokens
8

10

106
104

102
103
102
103
Number of Nodes
Number of Nodes
(log scale)
(log scale)
Nightjar (Baseline)
Manual Impl (Pass-by-Copy)

Figure 10: Performance of the Figure 1 programs. The shaded area shows the range of values. The
black dotted line marks when the encoded graph exceeds the context window size with pass-by-copy.

and N IGHTJAR (Baseline), using pass-by-reference to represent mutable objects, query pieces of
the graph as necessary. Thus, the token usage and execution time of N IGHTJAR and N IGHTJAR
(Baseline) increase at a slower rate compared to the pass-by-copy implementation as the graph
size increases. This enables N IGHTJAR (Baseline) to answer queries on large graphs when the
pass-by-copy implementation cannot, resulting in the higher pass rates. The specialization to Python
of N IGHTJAR enables the use of Python functions, which improves further the pass rate over the
baseline implementation. While programmers can manually implement using pass-by-reference,
N IGHTJAR supports this data representation style out of the box without additional configuration by
the programmer.

E.6

N UMBER OF E FFECTS TO RUNTIME

There is a direct relation between program runtime executed using N IGHTJAR with the number
of effects used, as each emitted effect corresponds to one inference pass through the base LLM.
Figure 11 is a scatterplot of the number of effects used and the runtime of each program execution of
SPSBench. It shows that the program runtime is proportional to the number of effects emitted during
program execution, with different LLMs exhibiting different ratios of runtime to number of emitted
effects.
37

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

400

Runtime (s)

300
200
100
0
0

20

40

60

Number of Effects

Sonnet 4 - Nightjar
GPT-4.1 - Nightjar

80

100

GPT-OSS 20B - Nightjar

Figure 11: Number of emitted effects in a program execution to runtime.

E.7

A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON LLM M ATH R EASONING B ENCHMARK

We evaluate the performance of N IGHTJAR on the full evaluation set of GMS8K (Cobbe et al., 2021),
consisting of 1319 math word problems using GPT-4.1. GSM8K is a benchmark for evaluating
LLM math reasoning, and thus does not require complex data structures nor meaningfully use
formal program state to solve. In this sort of application, using N IGHTJAR is equivalent to using an
LLM agent with code evaluation tools with isolated program states. We evaluate the performance
of N IGHTJAR on GSM8K to empirically validate this and show that N IGHTJAR’s performance is
competitive.
We compare against the manual implementation of program, which queries the LLM for a string
expression that the program then invokes the Python eval function on. We also compare against a
version of manual implementation that employs tool use with the OpenAI Code Interpreter (which
evaluates code in an isolated container) and a version that implements tool use with a custom,
user-defined code evaluation tool that maintains isolated program states.
Table 8 shows the pass rate, the average runtime, and the average number of tool calls or effects over
3 runs. N IGHTJAR achieves higher or equal accuracy to the manual implementations, demonstrating
that the N IGHTJAR system and the shared program state setup do not detract from LLM capabilities
on standard LLM tasks. N IGHTJAR incurs slightly higher runtime overhead than the basic manual
implementation program, because N IGHTJAR requires the LLM to emit effects. However, this runtime
overhead is similar to the overhead incurred by utilizing tool use with the OpenAI code interpreter
tool. Additionally, N IGHTJAR’s runtime overhead can be reduced with further system engineering as
shown by the optimized version of N IGHTJAR.
Table 8: GSM8K results using GPT-4.1.
Method

Pass Rate

Manual Impl

0.84±0.01

Manual Impl w/ OpenAI Code Interpreter

0.92±0.01

Manual Impl w/ Custom Code Interpreter

0.70±0.01

N IGHTJAR (Shared Python)

0.93±0.00

N IGHTJAR

0.93±0.00

38

Avg Time (s)

# Tool Calls or Effects

1.4

-

(0.8-50.4)

5.1

(0.1-304.7)

2.6

(1.0-24.9)

5.9

(2.3-58.2)

4.7

(1.7-36.3)

0.9

(0-3)

1.6

(0-4)

6.6

(0-29)

4.1

(0-16)

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

F

FAILURE A NALYSIS

We analyzed the 125 effect traces of N IGHTJAR on execution programs from SPSBench using GPT-4.1
and Sonnet 4. We labeled the reason the LLM failed to get a perfect score on the program for each
run of the program (25 program x 5 runs each = 125 runs in total). Table 9 shows the summary. Most
program runs pass all test cases (100% Pass). It is only in a few instances that the LLM gives up
on evaluating a prompt when it encounters an error (Give Up), hallucinates data (Hallucination),
or incorrectly performed the program state operation specified in the prompt (Incorrect State Op).
Most of the time, the LLM fails test cases due to making incorrect reasoning conclusions or math
computations (Reasoning). Decreasing failures due to incorrect reasoning requires more capable
LLM models or additional prompt engineering on the program’s prompts or the LLM system prompt.
Table 9: N IGHTJAR failure analysis summary.
Category

Sonnet 4

GPT-4.1

100% Pass
Reasoning
Give Up
Incorrect State Op
Hallucination

82 (65.6%)
41 (32.8%)
0 (0%)
1 (0.8%)
1 (0.8%)

69 (55.2%)
47 (37.6%)
4 (3.2%)
5 (4.0%)
0 (0%)

Total

125

125

We also further analyzed the types of error messages the LLM encounters when issuing effects and
how it attempts to recover from these errors. Table 10 and Table 11 show the summaries. Sonnet
4 encountered very few errors, most of which are due to incorrect syntax or incorrect data type
assumptions. GPT-4.1 encountered many more errors, most of them are due to confusing which
effects to use (State Op Error). For example, it often tried to use EVAL instead of EXEC, before
correcting its mistake to use EXEC successfully. It also often hallucinates variables (Forbidden
Var) by confusing references for variable names or using _ as a placeholder inappropriately. When
encountering errors, the LLM generally corrects its mistake. GPT-4.1 sometimes ignores the error
and performs a different operation instead or finds a workaround to performing the same computation.
Table 10: Types of errors encountered by emitted effects.
Error Category

Sonnet 4

GPT-4.1

State Op Error
Forbidden Var
Type Error
Syntax Error
Function Call Error
Index Error

0 (0%)
0 (0.0%)
4 (36.4%)
4 (36.4%)
2 (18.2%)
1 (9.1%)

219 (67.8%)
70 (21.7%)
15 (4.6%)
13 (4.0%)
2 (0.6%)
4 (1.2%)

Total

11

323

Table 11: Method of recovery by the LLM when encountering an error during effect handling.
Recovery Method

Sonnet 4

GPT-4.1

Correction
Ignored Error
Workaround
Retry
Not Recovered

7 (63.6%)
1 (9.1%)
2 (18.2%)
0 (0%)
1 (9.1%)

199 (61.6%)
59 (18.3%)
34 (10.5%)
22 (6.8%)
9 (2.8%)

Total

11

323

We show below the effect trace of the example program (graph in SPSBench) that did not pass the
test case with the input query “update the graph so paper 5 cites paper 14.” The execution did not
39

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026

correctly update the graph as it confused the direction of the graph edges, and instead updated the
graph such that paper 14 cites paper 5:
Effect: eval(str(type(query)))
Result: "<class 'str'>"
Effect: eval(str(type(graph)))
Result: "<class '<run_path>.Graph'>"
Effect: eval(hasattr(graph, '__doc__'))
Result: True
Effect: eval(getattr(graph, '__doc__'))
Result: "A directed graph. Nodes are represented by a set of node values. Edges are represented by a
dictionary of source node value to a set of target node values."
Effect: eval(str(dir(graph)))
Result: "['__annotations__', '__class__', '__contains__', '__delattr__', '__dict__', '__dir__', '__doc__
', '__eq__', '__firstlineno__', '__format__', '__ge__', '__getattribute__', '__getstate__', '__gt__
', '__hash__', '__init__', '__init_subclass__', '__le__', '__len__', '__lt__', '__module__', '
__ne__', '__new__', '__reduce__', '__reduce_ex__', '__repr__', '__setattr__', '__sizeof__', '
__slotnames__', '__static_attributes__', '__str__', '__subclasshook__', '__weakref__', 'edges', '
nodes']"
Effect: eval(str(type(query.strip().lower())))
Result: "<class 'str'>"
Effect: eval(query.strip().lower())
Result: "update the graph so paper 5 cites paper 14."
Effect: eval(graph.edges)
Result: Ref(1018[Obj])
Effect: eval(str(graph.edges))
Result: "{16: {4, 5, 10, 11, 17, 19, 21}, 12: {1, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 23, 24}, 9: {1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23}, 19: {0, 1, 4, 5, 10, 14, 15, 17, 20}, 18: {0, 3, 5, 6,
17, 20, 21, 22, 23}, 6: {3, 4, 8, 11, 13, 14, 20, 21, 22, 24}, 5: {2, 3, 7, 8, 11, 13, 14, 21, 23,
24}, 10: {0, 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 11, 14, 21, 24}, 15: {0, 1, 2, 4, 7, 13, 14, 17, 23, 24}, 21: {2, 3, 4,
7, 8, 11, 23, 24}, 11: {1, 3, 4, 17, 23}, 17: {2, 3, 7, 8, 22, 23}, 1: {3, 4, 7, 8, 20, 22}, 14:
{2, 7, 8, 13, 24}, 22: {0, 2, 20, 13}, 13: {24, 0, 4, 7}, 2: {3, 7, 20, 23, 24}, 23: {24, 0, 4}, 4:
{24, 8, 7}, 24: {0, 3, 20}, 8: {0, 3, 20}, 3: {20}}"
Effect: eval(str(graph.nodes))
Result: "{0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24}"
Effect: eval(14 in graph.nodes and 5 in graph.nodes)
Result: True
Effect: eval(5 in graph.edges)
Result: True
Effect: eval(14 in graph.edges[5])
Result: True
Effect: eval(set(graph.edges[5]))
Result: Ref(1116[Obj])
Effect: eval(sorted(list(graph.edges[5])))
Result: Ref(1152[Obj])
Effect: eval(str(sorted(list(graph.edges[5]))))
Result: "[2, 3, 7, 8, 11, 13, 14, 21, 23, 24]"
Effect: eval('break' in query.strip().lower() or 'terminate' in query.strip().lower())
Result: False
Effect: eval(sorted(list(graph.edges[5])))
Result: Ref(1372[Obj])
Effect: eval(str(sorted(list(graph.edges[5]))))
Result: [2, 3, 7, 8, 11, 13, 14, 21, 23, 24]
Effect: eval(response = sorted(list(graph.edges[5])))
Result: Success
Effect: done()

G

LLM U SAGE D ISCLOSURE

We used LLMs to correct grammar, to find related works, and to brainstorm conceptual terminology.

40

